[Amit Varma]: When I started the Scene and the Unseen four years ago, I could not have imagined what
[Amit Varma]: the show would become. At that time, I thought I will do 20 minute episodes on the unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequences of public policy. Today, this is a show that features long form conversations,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes longer than three hours on subjects that range from politics to history to economics
[Amit Varma]: to society and culture. And along the way, I discovered truths about the nature of audio
[Amit Varma]: and the power of podcasting that ran contrary to what I had earlier believed. Also, I built
[Amit Varma]: a listenership that was far more engaged and that cared more about what I was putting out
[Amit Varma]: than any readership I could have imagined as a writer. We are 200 episodes old today.
[Amit Varma]: What a journey it's been. Maybe it's time to sit back for a moment and take stock.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen. In fact, welcome to episode 200 of the Scene and the
[Amit Varma]: Unseen. This is a special episode for me for a number of reasons. One, 200 is a nice round
[Amit Varma]: number and it feels appropriate to celebrate it in a way that one won't celebrate, say,
[Amit Varma]: episode 196 or episode 203. But still, it's nice to have these milestones that allow you
[Amit Varma]: to celebrate or to take stock. Two, I'm using this episode to launch the Scene and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: books. Along with the publishers Westland, I'm bringing out a four-volume anthology of
[Amit Varma]: the Scene and the Unseen with curated excerpts from the 200 episodes of the Scene and the
[Amit Varma]: Unseen so far. These four volumes, which will be out early next year, will be divided across
[Amit Varma]: the themes of politics, history, economics, and society and culture. Three, I'm also launching
[Amit Varma]: the Scene and the Unseen merchandise, beginning with designer mugs that you can browse at
[Amit Varma]: sceneunseen.in slash stuff. And four, my good friend and frequent guest, economist Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajagopalan has put together a special episode in which she got 22 guests and fans of the
[Amit Varma]: show to ask me questions. So the tables have turned and I'm in the firing line. We ended
[Amit Varma]: up recording a five-hour conversation and I consider splitting it up into two episodes.
[Amit Varma]: But then I figured that me talking about myself felt a little bit self-indulgent. So it was
[Amit Varma]: best to just release it as one bumper episode. So this is therefore the longest episode ever
[Amit Varma]: on the Scene and the Unseen and regular programming resumes next week. Before we get to the conversation,
[Amit Varma]: I need to express my gratitude to those who made the show possible. Four years ago, I
[Amit Varma]: didn't listen to podcasts and therefore didn't understand why this was such a special medium.
[Amit Varma]: Then a friend of mine called Amit Doshi approached me. Amit ran the podcast network, IVM podcast,
[Amit Varma]: and he asked if I'd be interested in doing something with them. I met up with Amit and
[Amit Varma]: his then creative director, May Thomas, at a restaurant in Juhu called Fable and decided
[Amit Varma]: to take a shot at this show. May soon went her own way and my partnership with IVM ended
[Amit Varma]: last year as I went solo. But without Amit Doshi's initiative, you would not be listening
[Amit Varma]: to this. Almost all of my 200 episodes have had one editor, Vijay Doifode. Vijay's been
[Amit Varma]: a silent partner in crime, often fighting a valiant battle to salvage shaky audio. And
[Amit Varma]: I continue to feel so reassured that he remains by my side as I go down this path. The artwork
[Amit Varma]: of the show is done by the brilliant artist, Alekha Gupta, whose wonderful work adds to
[Amit Varma]: the character of the Scene and the Unseen. While Vijay and Alekha are the two people
[Amit Varma]: I work with every week, I also want to thank those who've played a part in this show in
[Amit Varma]: the past. Josh Thomas, Swati Bakshi, Abbas Mohamed, and Jude Weston helped produce it
[Amit Varma]: back in the IVM days. Madhu Menon built the website sceneunseen.in and took the podcast
[Amit Varma]: of photographs, which are actually pretty good photographs if you take the podcaster
[Amit Varma]: out of them. And May Thomas and Sean Fanthorne helped me with advice and support at crucial
[Amit Varma]: times. I also want to thank the many, many guests I've had over these 200 episodes who
[Amit Varma]: have trusted me and have been generous with their time and insights. It takes two people
[Amit Varma]: to have a good conversation, and I'm blessed to have been able to learn so much from so
[Amit Varma]: many wonderful people. And I also want to thank you, the listener, for making me feel
[Amit Varma]: that someone is listening and that this matters. I've often had lonely moments where I've wondered
[Amit Varma]: if this was worth it. And your constant validation and support has meant a lot to me. Also, since
[Amit Varma]: I opened the show up for support in April this year, many of you have made generous
[Amit Varma]: financial contributions to keep the show going. I feel guilty that I haven't been able to
[Amit Varma]: write to each of you personally to thank you for this. But it's been heartwarming and even
[Amit Varma]: moving for me. The show remains independent because of you. More than that, it remains
[Amit Varma]: meaningful to me because of you. So thank you for that. Over to the conversation now
[Amit Varma]: where Shruti unleashes one surprise after another. But you know the drill. Before we
[Amit Varma]: get there, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode. Besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going. And that involves
[Amit Varma]: you. My proposition for you is this. For every episode of the scene and the unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can
[Amit Varma]: do this by heading over to seen unseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice. This is not a subscription. The scene and the unseen will continue to be free
[Amit Varma]: on all podcast apps and at seen unseen.in. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help
[Guest]: keep this thing going. Seen unseen.in slash support.
[Guest]: And I'm frankly a little bit tired of being the conduit to fangirls and fanboys and listeners
[Guest]: everywhere. And I thought it might also be a little bit of fun to turn the tables on
[Guest]: Amit and ask him to be the guest for three and a half hours, right so that he knows how
[Guest]: the rest of us feel. Just FYI, for this episode, I am prepared with energy bars, caffeine and
[Guest]: water. I have only not come with like a pack for like survivorship or survivahood. But
[Guest]: other than that, I'm fully prepared. So this is why I've taken over the show and Amit,
[Guest]: welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me on your on my show. It's a great honor.
[Guest]: Yeah, the other reason I sort of took over is I have known Amit long enough that I can
[Guest]: be pushy and obnoxious and do things like invite myself over for the 200th episode at
[Guest]: the 100th episode. So we did you know, like a sort of big reflections episode 100 episodes
[Guest]: ago. And that was a little bit more fun because we got to have lunch at Oh Calcutta just before
[Guest]: we recorded that. So this time all the yummy food is missing and it's the pandemic and
[Guest]: we're not in the studio together. But other than that, it feels really, really nice to
[Guest]: celebrate this big sort of, you know, milestone.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I do. I don't know how we reached episode 200 dude. For what it's worth, I live
[Amit Varma]: and record in Mumbai and Shruti is in NYC and we record most of our episodes remotely.
[Amit Varma]: But you happen to be down in Mumbai that time. So we had lunch at Oh Calcutta and then recorded
[Amit Varma]: the 100th and here we are at the 200th. And I don't think you invited yourself in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that it feels perfectly natural to, you know, do a milestone episode with you
[Amit Varma]: because you know, I don't know if you remember, but you know, before the show started, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we did a bunch of sort of pilot episodes. And you were my guinea pig for those and listeners
[Amit Varma]: may not be aware of this. But before we launched the show, when I was partnering with IBM,
[Amit Varma]: the way we conceptualize the show was something of a produced show where I go on a theme and
[Amit Varma]: then we have soundbites from various people coming in and all of that. And later on at
[Amit Varma]: some point we realized that's too much of a pain and what the hell and let's just do
[Amit Varma]: a straight interview show because much easier to kickstart it and I had a good sense of
[Amit Varma]: it and the show of course went on to evolve massively from there. But Shruti was the guinea
[Amit Varma]: pig for many of those.
[Guest]: Yeah, not only was I a guinea pig, I must fess up here to all your listeners. I was
[Guest]: also someone who didn't think this was a great idea. I was like, why will people listen to
[Guest]: us? What is the point of recording this conversation? Really, the two of us are going to talk about
[Guest]: minimum wage or something like that. You know, one of the guinea pig episodes was I think
[Guest]: on minimum wage and I was like, who the hell is going to care about what we have to say
[Guest]: about this? So I was a big time naysayer. I'm really glad Amit did not take my advice
[Guest]: and he went with this. Otherwise, there would be no 200th show. So that's my mini confession.
[Guest]: But I became a big cheerleader for the show soon enough. This was just in the very, very
[Guest]: initial period.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, initially, like right now, for example, if you speak to me, I have a very
[Amit Varma]: good sense of what I'm doing and great conviction and what I'm doing and why I'm doing it. But
[Amit Varma]: at the start, it was just an experiment. It was like, let's do it. The show was nothing
[Amit Varma]: like what it is now. And, you know, from there, it's kind of evolved. And I mean, really one
[Amit Varma]: of the sort of the turning points in my thinking about the medium was episode 26, which we
[Amit Varma]: did together on the right to property, which was, you know, more than an hour. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, early on in the show, my conception of podcasting, my conception of media in general,
[Amit Varma]: because I didn't listen to podcasting, my conception of this kind of media in general
[Amit Varma]: was that people have short attention spans, and you have to hook them in the first 15
[Amit Varma]: seconds. And no matter how long you make it, it should not be longer than 20 minutes, which
[Amit Varma]: was all rubbish. And I'll, you know, maybe get a chance to elaborate later in the episode
[Amit Varma]: why I feel that way. But as we sort of when we did episode 26, which was more than an
[Amit Varma]: hour, I thought, okay, this is my best episode so far. And it happens to be my longest. So
[Amit Varma]: what is going on here? And I really enjoyed this and listeners seem to enjoy it. And it
[Amit Varma]: took a new life. And now of course, one hour is like a ridiculous miniature, I would never
[Amit Varma]: do something so hopelessly shallow. But what I'll do on social media, by the way, is release
[Amit Varma]: sort of without the numbers, I'll show you a list of my top 25 episodes in popularity
[Amit Varma]: because so many people discover the show and they're like, what should I listen to first?
[Amit Varma]: So I'll share the top 25. And you'll see that I think more or less all of them are more
[Amit Varma]: than two hours. And there's a very good correlation between sort of length and popularity.
[Guest]: I don't think it's a correlation between length and popularity. I think it's between quality
[Guest]: and popularity. You tend to engage more with guests who are very, I mean, I don't mean
[Guest]: some of your guests are not high quality. But you know, sometimes when the conversation
[Guest]: is going really well, you tend to go longer. And that is why the listener is hooked longer
[Guest]: because it is that good. So you know, it's this funny thing, Jerry Seinfeld, in one of
[Guest]: his shows, he talked about how a length and quality are just substitutes for each other.
[Guest]: And I think this was with Patton Oswalt. He said, you know, there are three second cat
[Guest]: and ad videos on YouTube that he can't tolerate two seconds off. But there are other things
[Guest]: which you know, you're willing to watch for hours, people are willing to watch the directors
[Guest]: cut a lot of rings back to back and things like that. So I really think it's not that
[Guest]: people enjoy the length per se, but it is the amount of quality packed in per minute,
[Guest]: which you have managed to sustain for three hours, I just cannot imagine how.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. And also what happens is, and I'm sure you'll, you know, I don't know what questions
[Amit Varma]: you have lined up for me with, you know, it's going to be a wonderful surprise as we go
[Amit Varma]: along. And we'll probably talk about interviewing. But one of the things that I do during an
[Amit Varma]: episode is always calibrate how long it should be, according to a number of factors, such
[Amit Varma]: as if I'm really enjoying it, and if it is a stimulating conversation, and there's enough
[Amit Varma]: dope to talk about, and the other person is willing, which is key, then I go on as long
[Amit Varma]: as I feel like, but sometimes the conversation may be great, but maybe the other and the
[Amit Varma]: other person also feels as great, but they just don't have the time they've given me
[Amit Varma]: three hours. So we have to end before that. That's fine. And sometimes there aren't, you
[Amit Varma]: know, enough things to talk about. And they kind of wind down. And sometimes I just feel
[Amit Varma]: that they're getting tired, they want to talk, they want to be kind, but they are just getting
[Amit Varma]: tired, they haven't sort of stacked up with energy bars and caffeine as you have. So at
[Amit Varma]: that point, I just, you know, I have to make the call that I have to be kind to this person
[Amit Varma]: and let them go. So they live to see another day and maybe another episode someday.
[Guest]: I have been told by my husband that I get hangry. I mean, he didn't have to tell me
[Guest]: I know this about myself. I didn't want to unleash the crazy demon version of me on you
[Guest]: and hence the snacks and the caffeine. So if I can begin right after this long prelude,
[Guest]: I mean, let me tell you the plan for the show, since you don't know what's going on, you
[Guest]: have a rough, vague idea. So we did something, we went behind your back, and we asked a group
[Guest]: of guests and fans, and this is not, you know, it's just a random ordering of people I know
[Guest]: you have enjoyed having on your show. And some of the fans I have interacted with on
[Guest]: Twitter, and I know that, you know, they're huge fans of yours. So those who are not on
[Guest]: this list, this is entirely my fault. Um, it had nothing to do with it. Right. So this
[Guest]: is just like a group of people who thought it would be great to ask you some questions.
[Guest]: So what we did was I just asked them to record a question in their voice and send it to us.
[Guest]: So Vijay, who is your sound guy, and amazing and my life savior, and who have traumatized
[Guest]: over the last, say, two to three weeks, has been very helpful in putting this together,
[Guest]: making sure we get all the recordings, they're of good quality. So I'm going to play the
[Guest]: question. And you have to answer the question. So for the listeners, this is pretty spontaneous,
[Guest]: because Amit doesn't know what's coming. Right. And I have a whole bunch of questions in the
[Guest]: middle that that, you know, I will have, I'm sure. And, you know, just as there is always
[Guest]: with your episodes, no fixed plan, no fixed script, we just take this where the conversation
[Amit Varma]: goes. Well, I'm really scared and excited, but a little scared, because normally I'm
[Amit Varma]: at the other end. I mean, it's very relaxing to be a guest, because I don't have to prepare
[Amit Varma]: and I don't have to wrack my brain about what do I ask next? And where do I take the conversation?
[Amit Varma]: And you're constantly on sort of focusing hard when you're the host being a guest is
[Amit Varma]: much easier. However, I don't know what's coming at me. So this is interesting. Where
[Guest]: are we starting? Okay, so we are gonna start with Manu Pillai, who has been definitely
[Guest]: one of your most popular guests, right? He also, I think, packs in the most number of
[Guest]: words per minute. And he is really one of my favorite authors, one of my favorite historians.
[Guest]: I love reading his books. So thank you, Manu, for your question. And here goes.
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit. You know, my question for you is quite simple. Because I've been on your show
[Unknown]: three times, and I've heard you discuss various things with various experts and writers and
[Unknown]: others ever since. And one of the things I've noticed is that you always spend a good amount
[Unknown]: of time right at the start, trying to get them to open up about themselves, their pasts,
[Unknown]: their childhood years, the kind of intellectual inspirations they've had, where they studied,
[Unknown]: what brought them to these junctures where they currently are. And I've always thought,
[Unknown]: what about you? You know, where did you grow up? What are the books you read? What made
[Unknown]: you this complete podcast guru? You know, this figure who's able to sort of woo other
[Unknown]: people and get them to talk about things that they may not necessarily otherwise relate
[Unknown]: to a public audience, but you managed to extract that kind of information. And I wonder if
[Unknown]: you let us extract a little bit of information about you as well, about your background and
[Unknown]: the things that make you who you are. I hope, you know, Shruti will ask you and prod you
[Unknown]: in this direction and get you to open up a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's such a lovely question. So, you know, before I get down to answering it, like,
[Amit Varma]: first of all, of course, we link all these episodes from the show notes, I must say that
[Amit Varma]: I've done three episodes with Manu and they were all a super hit. And he's been doing
[Amit Varma]: this lovely thing. Just be a guest. Yeah, no, but I have to, I have to say these things
[Amit Varma]: about these very kind guests of mine who have asked these questions that, you know, Manu
[Amit Varma]: has been on Twitter recently reading out from Hindi and Marathi translations of his books
[Amit Varma]: and just absolutely lovely. It shows you why he's like the resident chick magnet of Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: And he's got a great voice, you should totally get into podcasting, though, as I often keep
[Amit Varma]: saying that this is not radio, so voice does not matter. And I can elaborate on that separately
[Amit Varma]: if you want. But to sort of, before I get to answer this question, because I am a guest,
[Amit Varma]: I can ramble as much as I want, and the host cannot interrupt. That's the rule of the show.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd also like to talk about why I get people to open up. It's a conscious decision. It's
[Amit Varma]: not a decision at all, I have to reach three hours, how do I do it, spend one hour talking
[Amit Varma]: about them, but it's a conscious decision. But you know, not the intended reason, but
[Amit Varma]: part of why it works is the tactical thing is that it gets a guest to relax, and then
[Amit Varma]: they're more likely to trust you and open up and all of that. But the real reason I
[Amit Varma]: do it is for the listeners to sort of give them a sense of the flesh and blood person
[Amit Varma]: behind the ideas and the work that we're going to hear about. Because too often, I think
[Amit Varma]: that in the world, we and I've been thinking a lot and talking a lot about this recently,
[Amit Varma]: that we focus on abstract things and not enough on concrete things. So if you're talking about
[Amit Varma]: somebody's work and somebody's ideas, and you can go into all these abstract areas.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also interesting to me to get a concrete sense of who is this person? What is the journey
[Amit Varma]: where does she come from? What are the, you know, and I'm not referring to Manu as a her,
[Amit Varma]: I'm just, it's a generic pronoun. And so which is why I do that. But to sort of, and I think
[Amit Varma]: I actually talk enough about myself in little bits and pieces here that readers should already
[Amit Varma]: feel they know me. But basically, I was sort of, my dad is Punjabi, my mom is Bengali,
[Amit Varma]: my dad was an IAS officer. So I was born and brought up in Chandigarh, where I was still
[Amit Varma]: I think the eighth standard. And then my dad sort of shifted to Pune, where he was a director
[Amit Varma]: of the Film and Television Institute of India in the late 80s. In fact, he was a person
[Amit Varma]: who took the decision to expel Sanjay Leela Bhansali from the Institute, who was an editing
[Amit Varma]: student and demanded that his graduation film should be one that he's allowed to direct.
[Amit Varma]: And my father was like stickler for rules and know what are you saying you are an editing
[Amit Varma]: student and all of that. So I would have expelled him for aesthetic reasons alone. But I don't
[Amit Varma]: think my dad thought along those lines, I could have seen the future monstrosities that
[Amit Varma]: would come out of there. So, but I mentioned that as an important point, because I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, as a child, I basically grew up watching a lot of world cinema and thinking of it as
[Amit Varma]: something completely normal, not a separate genre, like world cinema or something, not
[Amit Varma]: as you know, a different kind of cinema, but as something completely normal, I would watch
[Amit Varma]: two, three films a day, that was a big influence on me. I was also fortunate because my dad
[Amit Varma]: is a reader and loved collecting books. And we had 1000s of books at home, literally many
[Amit Varma]: 1000s. So I would read I would just pick up whatever I came across and serendipity helped
[Amit Varma]: me when I was about the age of 10. And I saw this book, I still remember, it was a hardback
[Amit Varma]: modern library edition. And the book had the intriguing title of House of the Dead. So
[Amit Varma]: I thought, okay, this will be some really funky, nice, you know, thrilling book zombies
[Amit Varma]: and all that, whatever, I don't know, let's check it out. And it was a book by Dostoevsky
[Amit Varma]: about his years when he was in a prison in Siberia. And I was just blown away, my whole
[Amit Varma]: world was blown open, though I haven't read it since then. So I need to go back and read
[Amit Varma]: it. So I read all of Dostoevsky and then I read all the Russians. And then I got to Shakespeare.
[Amit Varma]: I read all of Shakespeare when I was 10. Though my I must say that while my reading was prolific,
[Amit Varma]: my tastes weren't very evolved. Because if I remember correctly, my favorite Shakespeare
[Amit Varma]: play was Titus Andronicus and kind of moved on from there. And then as I entered my teenage
[Amit Varma]: years, I kind of read less and less. My reading habits sort of went off into adulthood. But
[Amit Varma]: there was that early base where I had kind of read a lot and so on. And at this point,
[Amit Varma]: I had no sort of ideological sort of leanings. I was sort of probably mildly left liberal,
[Amit Varma]: like many people tend to be in college. And then I went to college and I decided, okay,
[Amit Varma]: I want to be a writer. So what do I do? How does one write and it seemed made sense to
[Amit Varma]: be to say, okay, I'll be an advertising copywriter. And right. So I did my BA in English literature
[Amit Varma]: in Ferguson College. And I did not then know of a story past. You know, it was in Ferguson
[Amit Varma]: College in I think 1892 or 1893 that Gopal Krishna Gokhale and who had one of the founders
[Amit Varma]: of the college met Mahatma Gandhi for the first time and they went for a walk on the
[Amit Varma]: grounds of Ferguson College and had a long chat. And it had a history of atheism. It's
[Amit Varma]: also in Ferguson College where Gopal Ganesh Agarkar, one of the great figures of our independence
[Amit Varma]: who sadly died too young, a great classical liberal, once while teaching a biology class,
[Amit Varma]: he asked all his students, if a donkey had God, what would that God look like? And then
[Amit Varma]: he held both his hands up above his ears. And brilliant. And I remember in, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Gokhale's biography by B.R. Nanda, there's an anecdote about how Gokhale tells someone
[Amit Varma]: about Ferguson College and that person says something to the effect of, oh, you come from
[Amit Varma]: that hotbed of atheism. Anyway, I wasn't aware of any of these in when I was in college and
[Amit Varma]: nor was I an atheist then. Like I said, I was mildly left liberal and mildly very fuzzy
[Amit Varma]: about God. And I thought spirituality and there is some bigger force out there and we
[Amit Varma]: cannot give it a name and all of that complete rubbish. Now, of course, I'm an atheist, but
[Amit Varma]: defined as the absence of belief. So I don't believe that there is no God. It's simply
[Amit Varma]: that I don't believe that there is a God. So this is a complete digression. But I remember
[Amit Varma]: a letter I did to the economist once said that, you know, saying that atheism is a belief
[Amit Varma]: system or a religion is like saying that not collecting stamps is a hobby. So that's kind
[Amit Varma]: of that's kind of how I look at it. But also what happened was then I went to Delhi from
[Amit Varma]: there. And in Delhi, I joined this place called HTA Hindustan Thompson Associates, where I
[Amit Varma]: spent a few months. And for whatever reasons, I wasn't happy advertising wasn't doing it
[Amit Varma]: for me. And at that time, you know, channel V had just started and they had come out with
[Amit Varma]: the quick gun Murugan commercials and all of that. And, and my then girlfriend now wife
[Amit Varma]: was in Pune, and she was planning to go to Bombay to study, although she didn't end up
[Amit Varma]: studying, she said she would study, but she was trying to go to Bombay and the long distance
[Amit Varma]: thing wasn't working out. So I said, TK, I'm going to go to Bombay. And that's the best
[Amit Varma]: decision you have made. It was so so I went to Bombay, I can I think I landed in Bombay
[Amit Varma]: on a Friday. And in Monday, I was employed at channel V. I worked in channel V for a
[Amit Varma]: couple of years, I worked for a couple of years more in MTV after that, you know, spent
[Amit Varma]: kind of five years between those two places. And then sort of moved on and did a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of things. I've spoken about that journey in other places. But basically, I sort of
[Amit Varma]: did. I tried to be an entrepreneur for a very short while, which was right after the dot
[Amit Varma]: com bubble burst. So not the best of timings that didn't work, then I joined wisdom, which
[Amit Varma]: bought Cricinfo. And I became managing editor there, did that for a few years. And because
[Amit Varma]: I didn't want to write only about cricket started a blog called India uncut, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, back in the day became kind of fairly popular, wrote that a lot. I call that my
[Amit Varma]: writing gym. Like, you know, when I sort of teach my writing course, now I tell people
[Amit Varma]: about how important it is to write regularly. And India uncut was great, because I was writing
[Amit Varma]: five posts a day. And because my attitude was it is just a blog, I wasn't paralyzed
[Amit Varma]: by the fear of anxiety that what will other people think of my writing, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. So I ended up doing some 8000 posts in five years. Then I moved on to sort of
[Amit Varma]: playing poker professionally for a living. And after five years of that, I decided that
[Amit Varma]: you know, it was taking a toll on my lifestyle, I had saved up enough to kind of not have
[Amit Varma]: to work for a while. So I thought, let me be a writer again, left that then I kind of
[Amit Varma]: became editor of the online magazine Pragati for a while, started the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: around the same time. And now I can safely say that I'm either a professional podcaster
[Amit Varma]: or a professional educator, none of which I would have, you know, expected five years
[Amit Varma]: ago, but like, here we are, it's, it's, it's, yeah, it's a wild journey.
[Guest]: You know, one of my favorite things about you, and especially because I have seen about
[Guest]: the last 15 plus years of this, this transition in your life, is that you never wait for there
[Guest]: to be this infrastructure or this institutional system. I say this specifically, because I
[Guest]: have students who asked me, how do I do this? How do I become a lawyer? Or how do I become
[Guest]: so and so? How do I start writing a column? And if I were to give them your example, it
[Guest]: would be just start doing it. And it will figure itself out and something will come
[Guest]: of it. Most people wait to be asked to do something. Most people wait for a job to exist
[Guest]: before actually doing what they care about. You are one of those few people who's just
[Guest]: like, I really enjoy doing this, and I'm going to do it. And that's the end of that. And
[Guest]: it's one of my favorite things about you. So what is your attitude about that? Were
[Guest]: you always like this as a kid? Does it come from having certain amount of privilege and
[Guest]: also certain amount of self knowledge that you know, you do something long enough, you
[Guest]: know, it's going to turn into something valuable? Where does this unique, you know, sort of,
[Guest]: it's not even entrepreneurial, it's really like, it's entrepreneurial, it's experimental.
[Guest]: It's really interesting characteristic of you that I have observed.
[Amit Varma]: Look, I think the privilege is always there. Because obviously, you know, I've had the
[Amit Varma]: good fortune of not really having to worry about my next meal is going to come from though,
[Amit Varma]: at the same time, I have essentially been completely self made got nothing from elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, been working since I was 20. And all, all of that. But my approaches, you
[Amit Varma]: know, it seems like it's planned. And there's a grand philosophy behind it. I do have a
[Amit Varma]: sort of, not a grand philosophy, but a way of thinking about these things now. But a
[Amit Varma]: lot of it when it happened was that I just felt enamored with something and I went ahead
[Amit Varma]: and did it. And I was always sort of an idealistic fool. And I never sort of thought about is
[Amit Varma]: there a market for this? Is this going to make money? Is this going to sort of lead
[Amit Varma]: to short term results and validation and all of those things. I just jumped into it. Having
[Amit Varma]: said that the one thing I wanted to do all my life, which is write novels is something
[Amit Varma]: I've just written one bad novel. So I haven't done enough of that. So actually, I haven't
[Amit Varma]: done what you're saying I've done, which is jump into what I love. But I've done a lot
[Amit Varma]: of other things which have interested me because I wanted to do them. Now my broad sort of
[Amit Varma]: advice to people would be whenever you're doing something two pieces of advice. One
[Amit Varma]: is don't overthink it. I think there is a trade off between getting it done and getting
[Amit Varma]: it right. And wherever there is a conflict between those two, you should privilege getting
[Amit Varma]: it done. And in fact, getting it done as a way to get it right, because you get it done
[Amit Varma]: once and then you keep doing it, doing it, doing it, you keep iterating, it becomes something
[Amit Varma]: else and event that's actually the only way to get it right. Like, even the scene and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen, for example, like I'm really proud of the episodes that I've done since say maybe
[Amit Varma]: episode 8090. And, you know, the last the last 100 episodes, so to say, but I don't
[Amit Varma]: like the early episodes at all. Because the conception of the show was very different.
[Amit Varma]: And as you keep doing it, you know, you sort of keep learning, you keep growing, you discover
[Amit Varma]: new things, and then it becomes a different kind of beast. So my first piece of advice
[Amit Varma]: is don't overthink it, where there's a you see that trade off between getting it done
[Amit Varma]: and getting it right air on the side of getting it done, just start and see where it goes
[Amit Varma]: throw things at the wall. My other way of looking at it, which is something I've come
[Amit Varma]: to realize this year, and maybe we'll get a chance to speak about it at length later
[Amit Varma]: in this episode is that, and this is a piece of advice I give creators that I think much
[Amit Varma]: as they say about futurists and science fiction writers, that they tend to overestimate the
[Amit Varma]: short term and underestimate the long term. I think creators do this as well, that many
[Amit Varma]: creators will start creating something and they'll overestimate the short term and what
[Amit Varma]: it will get them in terms of validation and financial rewards. And they'll say, my podcast
[Amit Varma]: will be so popular and it'll get so many hits and I'll make so much money and they overestimate
[Amit Varma]: that and they could get disheartened by that and stop doing it. But you might underestimate
[Amit Varma]: the long run because what will happen in the long run is something that you don't really
[Amit Varma]: know. I mean, look at someone like Joe Rogan, he's been podcasting for donkey's years and
[Amit Varma]: now he gets 100 million deals from Spotify. And obviously, there's a little bit of survivors
[Amit Varma]: bias at play there. But regardless, I think those who succeed in creative enterprises
[Amit Varma]: will be people who do it for the love of it. And of course, you have to be practical and
[Amit Varma]: you have to think about how you want to make money and so on. But there are people who
[Amit Varma]: do it for the love of it, and then it works out and then they sort of start thinking of
[Amit Varma]: all of these other aspects, many of which fall into place. So I won't say that I didn't
[Amit Varma]: want to make money of this. But I started seeing in the unseen, obviously, I wasn't
[Amit Varma]: like the first 108 episodes made nothing. And till I went independent, in fact, and
[Amit Varma]: broke with my as well partners, it was making very negligible money. And now for the last
[Amit Varma]: few months, it's better partly because, you know, and again, this is something which in
[Amit Varma]: the context of creators, I can speak about later that as creators, you have to think
[Amit Varma]: of what you do for each and what you do for revenue. And they may not often coincide and
[Amit Varma]: you may do something to build your brand which which then pays off in other ancillary ways.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a sort of now post facto of figuring out a lot of stuff. But the bottom line is
[Amit Varma]: that there was a long, long period when the show wasn't, you know, making any money, and
[Amit Varma]: it was a labor of love. And especially when it became the long form conversation thing,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I would often read many, many books to sort of prepare for it. And for each episode,
[Amit Varma]: and it became really hard work. So I remember once I was going to an episode recording,
[Amit Varma]: and I was feeling very low that day, I was saying like, what's the point, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: there's no money, there's nothing. Again, you know, one more time in my life, like India
[Amit Varma]: uncut, I'm doing something which is very popular, but there's nothing in it. And then at the
[Amit Varma]: end of the recording, I was like walking on air, I just felt so elated. And I thought
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, it's worth it for its own sake, it doesn't matter the other stuff can
[Amit Varma]: come or not come, but it's worth it for its own sake. And the recording for those who
[Amit Varma]: want to know though, it could have been many recordings, because I've, you know, made almost
[Amit Varma]: all the recordings I've done in the past couple of years are worth it for their own sake.
[Amit Varma]: But this was episode 150, which was with VK Kartika. And we were talking a lot about books.
[Amit Varma]: So that's sort of something that I enjoyed.
[Guest]: We have VK Kartika coming up later in some questions. But I want to go on to one of your
[Guest]: more recent episodes with Rajat Ubhiyankar. Right? This was this lovely episode on his
[Guest]: book on how he traveled across India with truck drivers. And he's asked a really interesting
[Guest]: question about influence of your parents, your father in particular. So just give that
[Unknown]: a click.
[Unknown]: Apologies if this question is a bit personal. But I recently found out that Amit's father
[Unknown]: was an IAS officer. Now I have several friends who are children of civil servants, IAS, IPS
[Unknown]: and so on. And so many of them are now committed vocal libertarians. So anecdotally, there
[Unknown]: seems to be a pattern at work here. So my question for Amit is, what role, if any, did
[Unknown]: witnessing the workings of the Indian state growing up play in you later becoming a libertarian?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's such a great question. Great, perceptive question. You know, to really speculate,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't know too many other libertarians and I don't even like to use that label now
[Amit Varma]: because I think labels make people think in tribal ways. So what I would kind of say is,
[Amit Varma]: if I may speculate on why it may be the case that children of bureaucrats might tend to
[Amit Varma]: distrust the state a little bit more is that they don't think of the state in abstract
[Amit Varma]: terms anymore, that they have seen some concrete effect of it because in a sense, they are
[Amit Varma]: part of it and beneficiaries of it in indirect ways. So perhaps that could be a reason but
[Amit Varma]: I never actually consciously thought about it. As it happens, my father was a remarkably
[Amit Varma]: honest IAS officer and known for that and perhaps even suffered for that. But regardless
[Amit Varma]: of that, I think the state is all around you. But I would like to think that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just growing up in those times, even if my father wasn't who he was, I would probably
[Amit Varma]: have, you know, grown to think the way that I do. Because in fact, I was not like a libertarian
[Amit Varma]: in childhood or something. Like I said, I was mildly left liberal if there's any problem
[Amit Varma]: my, you know, I'd want the state to step in and solve it. And, you know, all my intent
[Amit Varma]: for everything would be compassionate. And I would not think about outcomes and the way
[Amit Varma]: the world really works. And it's really much later in adulthood that I kind of turned away
[Amit Varma]: from that. But I would say that, you know, what you call libertarianism is, I think,
[Amit Varma]: a common human decency that all of us share. And this is something I want to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on at book length at some point. But the point of it is that in the concrete in our personal
[Amit Varma]: lives, most of us behave in ways that you would call libertarian, we respect the consent
[Amit Varma]: of others, we don't try to coerce others, we won't force somebody else to pay for our
[Amit Varma]: preferences. If we go to a restaurant with a bunch of friends, you know, we won't force
[Amit Varma]: everyone to order exactly what we're ordering, and so on and so forth. But when we go beyond
[Amit Varma]: the concrete and talk about the abstract, and we talk about the state, suddenly these
[Amit Varma]: values go for a toss. And we, you know, because we don't see the cost of the sort of coercion,
[Amit Varma]: and the other things that we then begin to recommend. So I would say that in our personal
[Amit Varma]: lives, most of us, if we are decent human beings, we are by default, what you are calling
[Amit Varma]: libertarians. I mean, I use the term in a shorthand way. And, you know, I'm just wary
[Amit Varma]: of using terms like these, because they're so tribal, but all of that. So I say that,
[Amit Varma]: so I don't know what part that played in my life. And I know the kids of a handful of
[Amit Varma]: bureaucrats and none of them think like me. So I think maybe Rajat's experience is different.
[Amit Varma]: I wonder how, you know, I should have asked him this during the episode, but it never
[Amit Varma]: came up. I wonder how truck drivers feel about sort of the state, because they are actually
[Amit Varma]: constantly victims in so many different ways of the oppressiveness of the state. So given
[Amit Varma]: how so many of us normalize that, perhaps they don't think about it at all.
[Guest]: The next question I want to ask you comes from another one of my favorite episodes on
[Guest]: your show, which is Chinmay Tumbe. And you know, his wonderful book and work on migration
[Guest]: that you talked about. And it just, you know, some of these stories, like whether it's Rajat's
[Guest]: book or Chinmay's book, to me, when I heard the episode, it didn't feel like it was about
[Guest]: truck drivers or it was about migration. It felt like it was this broad story about India
[Guest]: and Indians. And there is like this universality to these themes, like whether it's migration,
[Guest]: whether it's driving, that each one of us can immediately connect to what it is that's
[Guest]: going on. So big shout out to both of them. And I'm going to play Chinmay's question for
[Unknown]: you now.
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit. This is Chinmay Tumbe here. Congrats on your 200th episode. As you know, I love
[Unknown]: migration. And so my question for you is tell us something about your own migration story.
[Unknown]: What are your roots?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, yeah, my own migration story. So I mean, there are two ways in which I can tackle this
[Amit Varma]: question. And one, I've already kind of spoken about my background born and brought up in
[Amit Varma]: Chandigarh and then moved to, studied in Pune for a few years, was in Delhi where I worked
[Amit Varma]: in HTA for a year and then Bombay since then, the last 25 years, more than that. But before
[Amit Varma]: that, if you kind of look at where my parents are from, my mother was, you know, a Calcutta
[Amit Varma]: person, a hardcore Bengali, a Bhattacharya as it were. And my father was born in 1941
[Amit Varma]: in what is now Pakistan in Sheikhupura, which is a place in Lahore. And as a kid shifted
[Amit Varma]: to Calcutta, and he and my mom, you know, met in college and had a roaring love affair,
[Amit Varma]: which was the talk of the town and parental opposition, and all of that nonsense. And
[Amit Varma]: I guess fortunately, or unfortunately, for me, they kind of battled through. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: it's an interesting story. My father had, you know, when he graduated, he had sort of
[Amit Varma]: options where he had, he had private sector offers, I think from Clarion Advertising,
[Amit Varma]: which was then the number one to join the then editor of EPW. And this would have been
[Amit Varma]: the mid to early 60s. The then editor of EPW loved something he did. And he said, come
[Amit Varma]: and work with me. And one day you will be the editor and all of that. He also I think
[Amit Varma]: got a scholarship to Cambridge, Cambridge and whatever, for further studies, but he
[Amit Varma]: wanted to marry my mother. And my mother's father said the boy must have a job and a
[Amit Varma]: proper job, not some silly private sector job. And what is this going on over the place
[Amit Varma]: for studying? So my, so my father decided that, okay, he'll try for the IAS. So without
[Amit Varma]: really preparing for it, he gave the entrance exam and go through and voila. And, and the
[Amit Varma]: interesting thing is when I asked him about his past, and in fact, at one point, I thought
[Amit Varma]: that I should record these memories. So I sat down with a recorder and recorded a couple
[Amit Varma]: of hours of me talking to him not for the purpose of publishing anywhere, but just for
[Amit Varma]: my own sort of personal memories. And he doesn't really kind of care about his past. Like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when I was going to Pakistan for the cricket tour in 2006, I said, where were
[Amit Varma]: you born? You know, should I probably go there? And he said, No, no, don't bother. I don't
[Amit Varma]: even remember. It doesn't mean anything to me. So, you know, that's kind of how it was.
[Amit Varma]: And I once I've asked him a couple of times about counterfactuals about how his life would
[Amit Varma]: have been had he say gone to Cambridge or done this or done that or whatever. And he
[Amit Varma]: always kind of hedges and doesn't really give an answer to that. And but anyway, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: here I am. So all's well that ended well. The other way to answer that migration question
[Amit Varma]: is to also think about it in terms of the mental geographies we inhabit. That while
[Amit Varma]: I have, of course, been born and brought up in India and have lived here all my life,
[Amit Varma]: the mental geographies I have inhabited, and this would be true much more for millennials
[Amit Varma]: here today than perhaps would be people of my generation. But the mental geographies
[Amit Varma]: were always Western, in some senses, all the books I read were in English, and they were
[Amit Varma]: from all across the world. And all the music I heard was largely American and rock and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And my mental landscapes were mental, my Western, my ways of thinking about
[Amit Varma]: the world were Western. So I think that, you know, people in India are a kichri in more
[Amit Varma]: ways than just their physical geographies may indicate. And by the way, I want to say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whenever someone asked me to recommend a book that they should read about India,
[Amit Varma]: I don't recommend some of the famous books that I've done episodes on, I recommend India
[Amit Varma]: Moving by Chinmay Tummey, because I think it's a masterpiece, one of the best books
[Amit Varma]: of the last decade. And people haven't heard of it. And that's just such a blooming tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: So kindly go and listen to my episode with him because it tells us so much about who
[Amit Varma]: we are. It has so many TIL moments. Like, for example, you know, the biggest TIL moment
[Amit Varma]: in that episode for me while reading the book, in fact, for me was when he spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: the highest amount of migration in India happens when women get married and they leave their
[Amit Varma]: parental homes and they go to their marital homes. And most of us won't even and it's
[Amit Varma]: invisible, it's invisible. Most of us because we have such a male centric view of the world
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't even think of that as migration, right? You know, it just seems so natural.
[Amit Varma]: You're going from one home to another home, but it is migration and what are the influences
[Amit Varma]: that has and what happens. So it's a wonderful book. I'm sorry, I can't help plugging past
[Amit Varma]: episodes and books that I have enjoyed.
[Guest]: No, I'm thrilled because part of why I wanted to do this with you is also reflect on these
[Guest]: episodes, right? And the wonderful moments that have taken place. I want to take Chinmay's
[Guest]: question one step further and ask you some of the counterfactuals, right? Are there places
[Guest]: you chose not to migrate to where you had maybe job offers or, you know, family or school
[Guest]: or, you know, what were the parts you did not take?
[Amit Varma]: Well, so like I said, when I was a kid, you know, growing up as a kid in the FBI, where
[Amit Varma]: my father was director, I used to watch movies all the time. And at that point, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to be a writer since I was like, four or five years old. But at that point,
[Amit Varma]: I said, I also want to be a filmmaker. And my father through his connection said, Listen,
[Amit Varma]: you know, after you're done with whatever I can get you admission into the French Film
[Amit Varma]: Institute because a director there is a friend and blah, blah, blah, and we can do something
[Amit Varma]: and you want to go and I was a lazy bum. I said, I left to learn French. He said, Yes,
[Amit Varma]: I said, forget it. I'm cool here. And I didn't go. So, which I have actually not thought
[Amit Varma]: about since the time that conversation happened. But since you asked me, I suppose that is
[Amit Varma]: one counterfactual. And for what it's worth, I'm still passionate about cinema, but I decided
[Amit Varma]: not to follow that path because your creative product is dependent on too many other people
[Amit Varma]: and too many things falling into place. And I said, with my writing, I can just turn out
[Amit Varma]: books on my own, it doesn't matter. Now it so happens I've been a lazy bum. And I haven't
[Amit Varma]: actually written the 15 books I should have by now, though there is time to make up for
[Amit Varma]: that. But I don't really have any big counterfactuals. Apart from that, the fact is, I was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you want to look at counterfactuals, it would not be in terms of opportunities that
[Amit Varma]: came to me, but parts that I chose not to chase. So I could have gone, you know, I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure I could have gone the IIT IIM way if I wanted to. But I wanted to do arts because
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to write at some point. I'm sure if I really wanted to, I could have gone abroad
[Amit Varma]: and studied there and made a life there. But when I was young, I had this very rebellious
[Amit Varma]: attitude of why should I go abroad, I will do things on my own. And I was very anti the
[Amit Varma]: education system, and just anti just all those traditional paths that people take. And, and
[Amit Varma]: I don't regret any of that. I mean, if I have any regrets is that I haven't worked hard
[Amit Varma]: enough at what I set out to do. But I am convinced that I set out to do the right thing.
[Guest]: No, absolutely. Now, the next part, you know, I mean, since we were talking about the parts
[Guest]: that you have taken, and you haven't taken, these are two of not just your guests, you
[Guest]: know, that I whom I have loved in the episodes, and so on. But also two of my favorite people
[Guest]: who've come on your show. One of them I know well, and it's Prem Panikkar. The other one
[Guest]: I don't know at all, Joy Bhattacharya, but I feel like I know him through your episode
[Guest]: through a number of other things he does. Also, because I'm a cricket widow. And you
[Guest]: know, he's kind of around in the background if you're a cricket widow. And I love him
[Guest]: on Twitter. I love everything that he does. So I'm going to play you first Prem Panikkar's
[Guest]: question and then Joy Bhattacharya's question and you will know why in a minute that they
[Guest]: are coming together.
[Unknown]: Hey, Amit. Congratulations on the double hundred and here's the triple and beyond. You've had
[Unknown]: a storied career. You've been a cricket writer, editor, fiction writer, columnist, a two-time
[Unknown]: winner of the Bastiat, a poker player, pioneering podcaster, writing coach. I may have left
[Unknown]: out a couple of things, but that's quite a comprehensive CV as it stands. So which of
[Unknown]: these gives you the greatest satisfaction? And what is that one thing or things that
[Unknown]: is on your bucket list of things that you still want to do?
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit. Congratulations for 200 incredible episodes. So this is my turn to ask you a
[Unknown]: question. And here's my question. You've had many of that, from being a cricket writer
[Unknown]: to working in MTV as a producer, to being a poker player, to being an award-winning
[Unknown]: business journalist, and now a podcast host. So if you had to make a choice, which one
[Unknown]: of these previous professions or vocations would you have avoided? If you had to lose
[Amit Varma]: one of them, which one would it be?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Lovely questions by both of them. And they're both people who are personally close
[Amit Varma]: to me. I respect them a lot and I'm really fond of them. And Prem has been on a couple
[Amit Varma]: of episodes and Joy was on a very memorable episode about sports ecosystems where I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the second half of that episode with Joy where he talks about, you know, all the
[Amit Varma]: work he did setting up the football under 17 World Cup and all of that was just made
[Amit Varma]: me so happy. And it was so inspiring because, you know, I was like, here is another idealistic
[Amit Varma]: fool. So someone who's making much more of a difference to the world than I managed to,
[Amit Varma]: but just absolutely wonderful people and wonderful episodes. To answer that question, I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the tragedy is, I think none of them mentioned the one thing that I really thought
[Amit Varma]: of myself all my life as and which I haven't really done enough of, which is writing novels,
[Amit Varma]: writing fiction or literature or whatever. And I haven't done enough of that. And I will
[Amit Varma]: at some point do more of that. I've just written one shitty book, as I said, long ago and which
[Amit Varma]: was, yeah. So, you know, but out of all of these, look, the early years, like I don't
[Amit Varma]: even mention advertising or television on my CV because it just doesn't mean anything
[Amit Varma]: to me. It didn't enrich my life, didn't teach me anything. You know, as I think I enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: my blogging a lot, because sort of the more you write, you know, writing forces you to
[Amit Varma]: think. And, you know, there's something that I talk to my writing students about when I
[Amit Varma]: teach writing these days is that there is a two way causal relationship between clear
[Amit Varma]: writing and clear thinking. That not just that if you're, you know, it's obvious that
[Amit Varma]: if you're a clear thinker, you're more likely to write clearly. But equally, if you force
[Amit Varma]: yourself to write clearly in simple language about complex things, you have to think that
[Amit Varma]: much deeper about whatever you're writing. And that just improves the way that you think.
[Amit Varma]: So I think all that prolific writing that I did in my blogging years was useful to me.
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of, I'm happy with that. But you know, I used to say until recently that there
[Amit Varma]: is nothing I have done in my life that I can really be proud of. I think to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: now when I think about it, I think the scene in the unseen is I think I've created value.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, it's an ongoing journey, but I'm proud of some of the conversations that
[Amit Varma]: I've done. I also think that in what is a very new field, I've been able to sort of
[Amit Varma]: gather a certain understanding about a medium which did not exist there earlier, like I'm
[Amit Varma]: teaching a podcasting course now. And while preparing for it, so I had a whole bunch of
[Amit Varma]: insights, I wrote that down, structured it. And then I thought, let me see what others
[Amit Varma]: have taught. And I tried started going through other podcasting courses. And they were all
[Amit Varma]: like your basic dummies guide to podcasting kind of thing. These are the kind of mics,
[Amit Varma]: this is how you edit, this is how you do and none of the conceptual stuff that I had gathered
[Amit Varma]: over all this time. Like why is audio so different as a medium which people don't get so many
[Amit Varma]: people think of it as video with visuals, but it is incredibly different in every way.
[Amit Varma]: Why are podcasts so different from radio podcast is not just radio on demand. Like people think
[Amit Varma]: of Netflix as TV on demand, and that's correct. But podcasts are much more than radio on demand.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and some of that also came from my realizing the insane level of engagement
[Amit Varma]: with which my listeners have with the show, and the sense that many of them have that
[Amit Varma]: this means something to them that they have a stake in it, you know, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, I think that, you know, I've kind of the podcasting journey is very
[Amit Varma]: interesting, and it's an ongoing one. And I'm sort of enjoying it. But at some point,
[Amit Varma]: if I had to give up any of them, look at give up the poker years, not because I mean, I
[Amit Varma]: took it up because it was a an intellectual challenge and be unlike my other great passion
[Amit Varma]: until then, which was writing, I actually saw I could make money off poker. And I did.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the reasons I left was that I thought I'd played for a while make a few money and
[Amit Varma]: then you know, do my thing. And I found it doesn't really scale that way. You know, you
[Amit Varma]: get to a certain point. And after that, it becomes a question of access to bigger games.
[Amit Varma]: And it becomes very political in that respect. And also, it destroys your lifestyle because
[Amit Varma]: you're playing like, you'll play a 15 hour session, come back, sleep for eight hours,
[Amit Varma]: go play another session. And I also found that during those years, I felt like I was
[Amit Varma]: getting dumber. Because poker, you have to be obsessive to be good at poker, and you
[Amit Varma]: can't do anything else. So I stopped reading books, I stopped hanging out with friends
[Amit Varma]: apart from the people I played poker with. And you know, I was reading the biography
[Amit Varma]: of some famous poker player of the 70s. And there was a story about how for 20 and he
[Amit Varma]: was an American player. And there was a story of how for 20 years, he didn't know who the
[Amit Varma]: president of the US was. And I could understand that, because it was just constricting my
[Amit Varma]: whole whole world. And I felt my brain and I felt I have to get out. So even though I
[Amit Varma]: am not knocking, kind of what I did, going back, if I had to give a piece of advice to
[Amit Varma]: my younger self in 2009, it would be no, no, no, don't don't play poker, just just just
[Amit Varma]: focus on writing and do your thing. But poker also taught me a lot about the world that
[Amit Varma]: I think enriched the way I think about the world. For example, I think of the world much
[Amit Varma]: more in probabilistic ways, I recognize the impact of luck in our lives much more, which
[Amit Varma]: most people don't. Most people give too much credit to their agency and what they have.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they imagine they are responsible for their successes and their failures. And
[Amit Varma]: that's true to a very small extent, you know. So when we succeed, we'll tend to let it get
[Amit Varma]: to our heads and become arrogant. And when we fail, we let it get ourselves down and
[Amit Varma]: it will hurt our self image. And the truth is, in both of those is a lot of luck involved.
[Amit Varma]: And part of what you have to do as you go through life is become equanimous about the
[Amit Varma]: outcomes of the things that you do and the and the cards that life deals you like in
[Amit Varma]: poker, you you know that, you know, it's a game of skill, but the quantum of luck is
[Amit Varma]: much higher than in other sports or games of skill. So any single hand will be mostly
[Amit Varma]: luck. It's over a long period that the edge, the skill plays out. So you play a hundred
[Amit Varma]: thousand two hundred thousand hands. The tragedy is that in life, you cannot do that. In life,
[Amit Varma]: you get the cards that you get and it is what it is. But it is still important not to sweat
[Amit Varma]: what you cannot control and instead to focus on what you can control, which is you focus
[Amit Varma]: on the process or as that great poker player Lord Krishna once said, you know, just do
[Amit Varma]: the right thing and don't worry about the fruits of your action.
[Guest]: So before you continue on this, because, you know, you keep anticipating the questions,
[Guest]: which is very frustrating for me as a host, because you you can almost see what's coming
[Guest]: next. I have a question for you from Akshaya Mukul, also, who has been on your show. He
[Guest]: wrote this fantastic book about the Gita Press. Once again, you know, it was one of those
[Guest]: books that just opened my eyes to this entire world and subculture that I didn't know existed.
[Guest]: And Akshaya Mukul has really become one of my favorite thinkers. So, you know, I'm just
[Guest]: going to play his question for you and then we can continue talking about poker.
[Unknown]: Hello, Amit. Akshaya Mukul here. Good to see my favorite podcaster being interviewed by
[Unknown]: my favorite columnist, Shruti. Can you tell listeners about your life as a poker player?
[Unknown]: Thanks, Shruti, for this opportunity. See you both in person soon.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a lovely episode and Akshaya is such a wonderful, warm person and I can't
[Amit Varma]: wait to see him soon as well. And that's a great book. Again, I'll say that that's again,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I don't I don't in this age of hyperbole when you use terms like masterpiece, it almost
[Amit Varma]: feels like, you know, it's but again, as in the case of Chinmay's book for Akshaya's book,
[Amit Varma]: I absolutely mean it. The book he's written on the Gita Press is just incredible and so
[Amit Varma]: eye opening for someone like me. So my life as a poker player would, you know, this gets
[Amit Varma]: into odd territory because poker is illegal in India and it's only legal in the offshore
[Amit Varma]: casinos of Goa, which is where I first started playing. I think in 2009, I took a holiday
[Amit Varma]: to Goa and we went to Casino Royale, the offshore casino there, played a little bit of poker,
[Amit Varma]: had beginner's luck, and then decided this is what I want to do. And of course, I didn't
[Amit Varma]: know anything about the game then. But as I studied the game, the intellectual challenges
[Amit Varma]: overtook me and I kind of loved getting into the math and the game theory and all of that
[Amit Varma]: and that sort of changed the way I think about it. And I used to write a column on poker
[Amit Varma]: for the Economic Times as well, which I think I wrote 42 installments for them and stopped
[Amit Varma]: it at exactly the point where I decided to leave poker. And one of the interesting things
[Amit Varma]: about poker is that it is on the intersection of being a serious sport slash science and
[Amit Varma]: gambling. So, you know, you might be treating it as a serious sport and a serious science,
[Amit Varma]: but there are people who are sitting with you who are essentially just addicted to gambling.
[Amit Varma]: They're playing it for the dopamine rushes. And I wrote columns about this as well. It's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the way the, I mean, gambling addiction in biochemical terms is, you know, the same
[Amit Varma]: as addiction to alcohol or cigarettes or whatever you take a puff or you drink a peg, you get
[Amit Varma]: that dopamine rush. It's a similar thing with sort of gambling. And that led to this period
[Amit Varma]: of frustration where I felt that what is the point of my skill? It's I'm not playing against
[Amit Varma]: other people who are also treating it as a serious skill and as a game theoretical thing.
[Amit Varma]: I am playing it with people. And by this, I mean, in the underground cash games that
[Amit Varma]: I used to play in Mumbai and around who are just sitting off, you know, have no idea what
[Amit Varma]: they're doing. And eventually, it's all going to come to us. And I remember there was me
[Amit Varma]: and a very close friend of mine who's also pro and a really good player and who's gone
[Amit Varma]: on to do phenomenally well in the last five years since I left, though not because I left,
[Amit Varma]: but in general. So he and I were at a game together in Vashi. And there was a third person
[Amit Varma]: in the game after the whole game had wound up and he was a big builder there and he was
[Amit Varma]: high on cocaine and he will just every hand he would just, you know, push a ton of chips
[Amit Varma]: and huge amounts of money blind without looking at his cards. So it's only a matter of time,
[Amit Varma]: right? And then we are driving back and both my friend and I, his name is Jagdeep and both
[Amit Varma]: Jagdeep and I were, we didn't feel good about the whole thing. And we were like that, what
[Amit Varma]: is the difference between us and drug dealers? It almost feels like we're exploiting someone's
[Amit Varma]: addiction. So there was that aspect of it where, as you would know, I keep talking about
[Amit Varma]: all how all human interactions are positive, some interactions, right? So if I create a
[Amit Varma]: podcast and someone listens to it, and like every interaction that takes place is a double
[Amit Varma]: thank you moment, both people benefit, which is why they say thank you to each other. Poker
[Amit Varma]: is not like that, right? It's a zero sum game. And you know, considering that if you're playing
[Amit Varma]: at a place where the game is being great, it's actually a negative sum game. And you
[Amit Varma]: only win when someone else loses. And someone else losing is not just someone else losing
[Amit Varma]: someone else losing means their sort of lives could just fall apart. And I've seen that
[Amit Varma]: happening to people. I've tried to make interventions in the case of two friends of mine who were
[Amit Varma]: addicted to gambling. And I remember, you know, I mean, there are just very sad stories.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to get into them right now. But one thing you realize is that interventions
[Amit Varma]: don't help. And people might rationally realize that they're addicted to something, but they
[Amit Varma]: can't help themselves. You know, and I, for example, see that, like, I think I might be
[Amit Varma]: addicted to social media, for example. So, you know, or maybe addicted to distraction
[Amit Varma]: if they can be such a thing. But the bottom line is, I think all of us know this, that
[Amit Varma]: we know that I should not, you know, go on Twitter now, or I should not start watching
[Amit Varma]: a YouTube video now, because I will go down a rabbit hole and watch 50 of them. But then
[Amit Varma]: you just start and, you know, and most of the time, the sort of the impact of harmless
[Amit Varma]: addictions like that, as it were, is not such a big deal. Like, when I was trying to wean
[Amit Varma]: friends of mine of poker, I'd say just play online chess here, you know, you know, that's
[Amit Varma]: a better thing to get addicted to, because you're not losing money, you're losing time.
[Amit Varma]: And I've just seen horrendous consequences of this. And it all happens below the surface,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the families of people realize what has happened to them, they may try to help
[Amit Varma]: them, there's really nothing you can do. It's a downward spiral. And it's horrendous. And
[Amit Varma]: that's why, you know, when I started playing poker, I had the impression that the winners
[Amit Varma]: stay in the game, the losers leave the game. And over a period of time, what I realized
[Amit Varma]: when I was leaving, is that it's the other way around that it's the winners who eventually
[Amit Varma]: leave the game, but the losers are addicted, they cannot leave the game. So there are all
[Amit Varma]: these aspects. So while I was an evangelist of poker once upon a time, because it's so
[Amit Varma]: intellectually stimulating, and all of those things, there is also this other dark, seamy
[Amit Varma]: side to it. And you cannot, you know, rationalize that by saying that this is, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: voluntary action of consenting adults and all of that, which of course it is, which
[Amit Varma]: is why the state should not ban it. But it is nevertheless a social problem. And you
[Amit Varma]: would hope that, you know, solutions emerge from within society.
[Guest]: Yeah. And this actually brings me to another really lovely question that Karthika has asked
[Guest]: almost exactly on this aspect of, you know, you nurturing your love for poker and then
[Guest]: walking away from it. So I'm going to play Karthika's question now.
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit. This is Karthika. Congratulations on this fabulous milestone of 200 episodes.
[Unknown]: And here's my question for you. It's a bit personal, actually. I know you were really
[Unknown]: involved with poker at one time, you played poker, you wrote about it, then at some point
[Unknown]: you decided no more. I was reading about addictive personalities the other day. And I wondered,
[Unknown]: is that how you would describe yourself? What's it like nurturing a love for something and
[Unknown]: then killing it? I really want to know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's such a lovely question. And I should say my episode with Karthika is of
[Amit Varma]: course one of my favorites. And I'm and I kind of mentioned why for sort of those reasons.
[Amit Varma]: But also, I mean, it's a great episode by itself. But also, she is the publisher at
[Amit Varma]: Westland. And as I mentioned in the introduction that they are publishing the four volumes
[Amit Varma]: of the scene and the unseen, you know, selected excerpts from conversations I have had, you
[Amit Varma]: will have to wait a while Shruti to see if your conversations get featured or not. But
[Amit Varma]: yeah, that's, that's a really good question. And it's something that I thought a lot about
[Amit Varma]: like, number one, I would venture that many more of us are prone to addiction than we
[Amit Varma]: think, except that, you know, in some cases, it may manifest in very overt addiction to
[Amit Varma]: either alcohol or drugs or whatever. But there are so many other things that we can get addicted
[Amit Varma]: to, like when I, you know, I've done a bunch of episodes with about the Mughal period with
[Amit Varma]: say, Manu and Manimugdha and Ira Mukherjee and I need to record with her again soon.
[Amit Varma]: She's incredible. And one of the things that keeps coming up again and again, Parvati Sharma
[Amit Varma]: also, and one of the things that keeps coming up, Supriya Gandhi recently, and one of the
[Amit Varma]: themes that keeps coming up again and again, and all the wonderful books is how so many
[Amit Varma]: of these Mughal princes and all that died of alcohol addiction. And the thing is that
[Amit Varma]: it just strikes me thinking aloud that that is the only thing you would get addicted to
[Amit Varma]: what else are you there's no social media, there's no Twitter, there's no poker, there's
[Amit Varma]: no chess. So alcohol is going to be one of the most common ways for affluent people who
[Amit Varma]: can afford enough alcohol to get addicted to. But to come back to it, I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I was sort of playing poker, I the thought crossed my mind when I decided to leave that
[Amit Varma]: I'm a winning player, but it could be the case that I am an addict and a winning player.
[Amit Varma]: And what will happen if that is the case, and I am glad to report it wasn't the case.
[Amit Varma]: As I left, I had no urge whatsoever to play the game. Like once in a while, I will, you
[Amit Varma]: know, watch some interesting poker videos or whatever, you know, just for the intellectual
[Amit Varma]: aspect of it, like these days, we're recording on November 10, there's a great match going
[Amit Varma]: on between Doug Polk and Daniel Negrano, sort of a heads up grudge match. And I'm a big
[Amit Varma]: fan of Doug Polk. And I think he's going to destroy Negrano. So although Negrano in popular
[Amit Varma]: circles is much more famous, but he's like the Chetan Bhagat of poker, frankly. So in
[Unknown]: terms of
[Amit Varma]: I have no idea who these people are. But that reference I know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so I'm kind of, you know, following that match. But otherwise, I don't get the
[Amit Varma]: itch to play at all, which is great. But I think I might like I play a lot of online
[Amit Varma]: chess. I think there is this interesting case that there is an addictive side to my nature.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is, what outlet do I give it? And, you know, online chess is an interesting
[Amit Varma]: outlet. And I, and I play online chess and chess.com. Like, do you want to find my name
[Amit Varma]: there? I play under an avatar. And in fact, I have a girl's avatar. So people keep hitting
[Amit Varma]: on me, horny Indian boys keep hitting on me. And also, I probably win more games and I
[Amit Varma]: should because of that. But I played at the way the fish used to play poker, the bad players
[Amit Varma]: used to play poker, that is that I don't want to improve, I just, I'll play one minute games
[Amit Varma]: for timepass, bullet or bullet or blitz games for timepass. And I don't want to improve.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't want to work on my game, which is how a lot of people play poker back in
[Amit Varma]: the day that they would not improve at all. While you know, the rest of us would study
[Amit Varma]: a bit and we would discuss hands with other good players. What were the choices? What
[Amit Varma]: do you think his range was? But bad players are just playing for the heck of it. And of
[Amit Varma]: course, many bad players will make a show of going through the study, but not actually
[Amit Varma]: do any of it. To answer that question, I think I think I am. I don't know if addictive is
[Amit Varma]: the right word for it, because it's never gone beyond a certain limit. But I think I
[Amit Varma]: am intense, where I'll, you know, get into something and just go all in. Like I've, I
[Amit Varma]: went all in on podcasting, I went all in on blogging, and I'll, I'll just go all in into
[Amit Varma]: things which is great. But what I need to do is I need to go and you know, with Kartika's
[Amit Varma]: encouragement and help, I think I'm on my way to doing that now is go all in on actually
[Amit Varma]: writing books, you know, not just a compilation like this is but actually go all in on writing
[Amit Varma]: books, because everything that I've gone all in for while rewarding for its own sake and
[Amit Varma]: in many other ways, has also sort of distracted me from that thing, which I think is so core
[Amit Varma]: to myself as a writer and storyteller. So I need to do a little bit more of that. Yeah.
[Guest]: Do you think you're being a little bit you're judging yourself too harshly in the sense
[Guest]: that maybe the only way you know how to do some of these things is to be all in, right?
[Guest]: So it's not a question of addiction or no addiction, it is that you do things by immersing
[Guest]: yourself in it, whether it is writing a novel, or whether it is doing a podcast. And it is
[Guest]: very hard for you to do things on the side, like you just completely commit. So the the
[Guest]: product that comes out of it, whether it's a podcast, whether it's columns, whether it's
[Guest]: the blog, it is the quality and the output, it's a function of the fact that you are that
[Guest]: immersed, right? For for the rest of us, it never quite hits that level. Maybe because
[Amit Varma]: of that lack of immersion. Yeah, no, no, absolutely. I don't regret the immersion of the going
[Amit Varma]: all in. Because it's it's fruitful, and it works. And, you know, and I also know how
[Amit Varma]: to sort of disengage from something if it is not working, or I'm not loving it so much.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not like I go all in on every single thing that I do. But when I'm enjoying something
[Amit Varma]: like you know, like India Uncut or back when I was blogging regularly, or the scene in
[Amit Varma]: the unseen or poker, I'll just go all in. But the regret is that the you know, the going
[Amit Varma]: all in comes at the expense of something which is, in my case, it's a writing of books like
[Amit Varma]: pre poker, I don't really regret the very meandering journey I took because I don't
[Amit Varma]: think I had the life experience or the maturity to be able to write good books anyway. But
[Amit Varma]: I think I was just kind of getting there when I gave five years to poker. And I think that
[Amit Varma]: had had the opportunity cost that I could have written a number of books by now, which
[Amit Varma]: I haven't. So that part for that reason, in terms of a life choice, I kind of do regret
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So now I have a slightly lighter question on poker. But before I play the question for
[Guest]: you, this is from Harsha Bhogle. Again, one of the best episodes you know, you've done
[Guest]: for many reasons. I mean, I'm not a cricket person at all. I play cricket as white noise.
[Guest]: But because I was raised in India, and because I started watching cricket in the early 90s,
[Guest]: and also because I'm a cricket widow today. Harsha Bhogle's voice has literally been the
[Guest]: soundtrack of my life, right? It is always in the background. So when he sent in the
[Guest]: question for me, the most joyous thing was just hearing his voice. And and that you know,
[Guest]: he asked you a question. So I'm just going to play it now. And it's related to poker,
[Unknown]: but it's related to life.
[Unknown]: Ah, the hunter becomes the hunted. So Amit, I had a question for you. I've always been
[Unknown]: fascinated in sport by the interplay between skill and bluff. There are a lot of very skilled
[Unknown]: people can't play the bluff. Shane Warne was a master of combining extraordinary skill
[Unknown]: and bluff. Now, you play poker, and I would imagine not having played it myself, that
[Unknown]: there is a wonderful interplay of skill and bluff in poker as well. My question is not
[Unknown]: about that, though. My question is about poker players. Do you find that people who play
[Unknown]: poker and who therefore are playing the bluff almost every day and playing it with a lot
[Unknown]: of skill? Do they live life like that as well? Are they do they take chances? Are they gamblers
[Unknown]: in life? Are they a little edgy? Or is that a persona they put on when they get on to
[Unknown]: the on to the poker table? Hmm. Love to know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's such a lovely question. And I really enjoy, I've got to, you know, again,
[Amit Varma]: a few words about Harsha before I answer this question. My first introduction to audio as
[Amit Varma]: someone who did audio, my first attempt at audio was, I was, you know, I traveled to
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan with, you know, following the Indian cricket team in 2006. And I was covering it
[Amit Varma]: for the Guardian and also writing about it for Crick Info, where I was actually employed
[Amit Varma]: at the time. And I also got a side gig where for one of the BBC channels every day, I would
[Amit Varma]: have to give a one minute update on what was happening at the time they called me. And
[Amit Varma]: if at that, and so I would have my narrative prepared, so many wickets have fallen and
[Amit Varma]: all that. But I'm actually watching the match at that point. And if something happened right,
[Amit Varma]: then I would have to weave it in, which I found difficult. So I was struggling with
[Amit Varma]: that. So Harsha was on the tour as a broadcaster. And at one point, I, you know, I mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that I had this problem. And he was so kind. I think if I remember, he sat with me for
[Amit Varma]: half an hour told me about the sort of the all the basics of what to do for radio and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, really calmed me down and gave me great advice, all of which I have completely
[Amit Varma]: forgotten. And I didn't do audio after that for many years. But it speaks to his kindness
[Amit Varma]: that he was also such a huge superstar at the time, like you correctly said, and, and
[Amit Varma]: such a, you know, a warm and helpful human being. To answer the question, there are different
[Amit Varma]: aspects to it. Number one is that as far as what are poker players like, do they also
[Amit Varma]: bluff their way through lives? I think the the people who are addicts to poker are also
[Amit Varma]: people who are doing all kinds of other gambling. So there would be people who would be constantly
[Amit Varma]: on the phone call with bookies betting on cricket betting on this betting on that. And
[Amit Varma]: that's the way that they are. The people who were treating it like me were not like that,
[Amit Varma]: number one. But number two, the thing about bluffing is that has the sort of has a deal
[Amit Varma]: that when you're bluffing, you're playing a game of probabilities. For example, I hope
[Amit Varma]: I don't get too technical here, but I'll try and kind of explain the way to think about
[Amit Varma]: bluffing. Let's say that if there is a pot on the river with 1000 rupees, right? So I
[Amit Varma]: bet 500 rupees into it. Okay, now there's 1500 in the pot to win that 1500 you have
[Amit Varma]: to call 500 bucks, right? So you are getting three to one odds, which means that you have
[Amit Varma]: to be right one in four times for your call to be correct. Right? Which means that optimally,
[Amit Varma]: I have to be bluffing there one in four times. And the rest of the time I have to have value
[Amit Varma]: bets. If either of us deviates from these percentages, they are making a mistake and
[Amit Varma]: they will lose in the long run. So the result is that if you do not, if somebody never bluffs
[Amit Varma]: and they are betting a value hand 100% of the time, two things happen. One is you don't
[Amit Varma]: get enough value hands in poker, so you will not win enough hands. But more importantly,
[Amit Varma]: your opponent will see that you are never bluffing and therefore they will always fall
[Amit Varma]: to your bet. So you're never going to make enough money. So therefore, bluffing is not
[Amit Varma]: something that is any different from any other kind of bet that you're trying to fool someone.
[Amit Varma]: It's just something that mathematically you have to throw in for your poker to be profitable
[Amit Varma]: in the long run. And you throw it in depending on a variety of factors like how you are building
[Amit Varma]: your ranges and how your sort of whole thinking about the game is. In fact, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: is known as like there are two and this is another interesting thing to note is that
[Amit Varma]: people think that tells count that, you know, in movies they'll show that somebody bluffs
[Amit Varma]: and then he's completely still all over and the other guy looks at him and he'll see a
[Amit Varma]: vein popping somewhere and he'll be like, ha, he's bluffing, call, call. But in real
[Amit Varma]: life, actually, that once you pass a certain level of poker, it doesn't matter. Good players
[Amit Varma]: won't even look for tells. It's all about the math. And there are two things come in
[Amit Varma]: in poker. There are two kinds of sort of poker that you can play. One is exploitative poker,
[Amit Varma]: where you try to exploit a mistake the other person is making. So if they call too much,
[Amit Varma]: you value bet more. If they fold too much, you bluff more, you adjust according to that.
[Amit Varma]: The other is game theory optimal poker, like in the example I pointed out, where it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: matter what he does, you get your frequencies right. So if you bet 500 into 1000 to a river
[Amit Varma]: and you give him 3 to 1 odds, you build your range in such a way that you have that percentage
[Amit Varma]: of bluffs and that percentage of value hands. And then in the long run, you cannot lose.
[Amit Varma]: If he deviates, he loses by either calling too much or folding too much, but you cannot
[Amit Varma]: lose. So if you play game theory optimal poker, it doesn't matter what the opponent does.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to look at him. It doesn't matter what his tendencies are. Now, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: game theoretical optimal poker is a theoretical construct. No human being can possibly play
[Amit Varma]: it perfectly. But the better you have an idea of what GTO poker might be, the better you
[Amit Varma]: will be at spotting mistakes that the other person makes and therefore exploiting them.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the fascinating thing, in fact, about this duck poke versus Daniel Negrano match
[Amit Varma]: that I'm kind of talking about is duck. So Daniel Negrano is an old school poker player
[Amit Varma]: who plays exploitative poker. He'll sit at the table and he'll stare at your neck and
[Amit Varma]: he'll look for bluffs and he'll kind of do all of that. And it's all a lot of psychology
[Amit Varma]: and all that. Duck poke is a new computer generation player who basically at one point
[Amit Varma]: in time was the best heads up cash game player in the world. And he's completely into GTO
[Amit Varma]: stands for game theory optimal. And he's completely into game theory optimal poker. And he had
[Amit Varma]: an incredible video channel, which sadly started after I left poker, where he would, you know,
[Amit Varma]: talk about different hands from a GTO perspective and just really mind blowing and educative.
[Amit Varma]: Though he retired from poker at a particular point in time, but he had once mocked Negrano
[Amit Varma]: and they had this feud going on. And it was a feud about ideas. Like one of them said
[Amit Varma]: rake is good. The other one said too much rake is bad. There should be a limit. This
[Amit Varma]: guy said no more rake is good and blah, blah, blah. So they had a battle over ideas, but
[Amit Varma]: being macho, they decided to settle it over the field. And so therefore, they are now
[Amit Varma]: having a challenge match, which is 25,000 hands. And at the time of speaking, I think
[Amit Varma]: only 1000 hands are over and poke is already up. I think $250,000 or something. And the
[Amit Varma]: other board deposited a million each to begin with, though I think if Negrano goes all the
[Amit Varma]: way, he'll end up depositing more and losing more. So it's like new school versus old school.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, regardless, I think the idea that most people have of poker that is that is
[Amit Varma]: a of exploitative poker. And B, I think they overplay the psychological and the tell aspects
[Amit Varma]: and the bluffing aspects. And as far as bluffing is concerned, the way you think of it is you
[Amit Varma]: have a range for every particular situation, whether you're calling or you're betting,
[Amit Varma]: and you play with that range. And that range will include both value hands and bluffs.
[Amit Varma]: So when you psychologically when you think about it, you're betting with that range and
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't really matter, you're playing correctly. And, you know, equally when somebody else
[Amit Varma]: is playing against me, if that person is a competent person, I'm thinking of their range
[Amit Varma]: in my range in that spot. And, you know, playing accordingly and all of that and I don't really
[Amit Varma]: want to get into poker theory here. But I'll say that those typical popular culture stereotypes
[Amit Varma]: of poker players are, you know, where those stereotypes are of these dynamic people wearing,
[Amit Varma]: you know, sunflower shirts and dark glasses and doing flamboyant things and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's completely false. But where it comes to geeks who are sitting in front
[Amit Varma]: of a computer and, you know, I have known of people who play 24 hour sessions and they'll
[Amit Varma]: have a bottle near them so they can pee into it because they're playing 20 tables at a
[Amit Varma]: time and they don't want to get up to go to the loo. That's true.
[Guest]: Oh, wow. No, there is one interesting element to what you said, which is the difference
[Guest]: between when you do this in a repeated game, not just necessarily with one person, but
[Guest]: also with yourself, like, you know, when you play lots and lots of hands versus if you
[Guest]: were sort of, you know, playing with your family, you know, over Thanksgiving or on
[Guest]: Diwali, you play Tash, something like that. You're just hanging out and you're playing
[Guest]: a game. Right. So to me, it seems like the element of surprise or bluff can have a lot
[Guest]: of value there in this one time game or in a new interaction. But in the repeated game,
[Guest]: it doesn't. Right. As you just pointed out, that other things take over. So now I'm going
[Guest]: to ask you, Harsha's question from that point of view, when you meet people the first time,
[Guest]: do you hold your cards close to your chest? Are you able to like sort of, you know, bluff
[Guest]: easily? Not in the sense of telling lies, but in the sense of, you know, just being
[Guest]: polite and not getting too much into it or not letting them know exactly what you're
[Guest]: thinking. But with people over a long period of time, people who are close friends, collaborators,
[Guest]: you know, people in your family that, you know, all of that goes away. Does that end
[Amit Varma]: up mimicking about the same? You mean my real life interactions, not my poker playing with
[Amit Varma]: them? Your real life interaction, not your poker. I think the thing is, like, first of
[Amit Varma]: all, it's unusual that I should do a podcast where I actually talk to people because in
[Amit Varma]: real life, I'm almost like a super introvert. And as you know, and I'm not really, you know,
[Amit Varma]: unlike like with all introverts, it saps my energy to interact with people, especially
[Amit Varma]: people I haven't met before. So left to myself, I would just be sitting in a corner and kind
[Amit Varma]: of writing books. But but yeah, so I mean, I, I don't know, the thing is, yeah, okay,
[Amit Varma]: it's the first time I've had to think about it. How do I kind of interact with people?
[Amit Varma]: It is true that I have very few close friends, you would count as one of them, don't worry.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't sort of make friends very easily. I mean, that that's kind of true. And I don't
[Amit Varma]: really get out all that much. And I'm very awkward in in those senses. Also, I think
[Amit Varma]: I don't know, I mean, the other aspect of this is that I have just changed so much as
[Amit Varma]: a person over the years, that I don't really like the person I was when I was younger,
[Amit Varma]: at different phases of my life. And maybe that's a good thing you learn as you go along
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But it's it's sort of difficult for me to therefore, you know, I don't know
[Amit Varma]: this is, if any of my guests gave me an answer like this, I'd be mentally pissed off, right?
[Amit Varma]: I've completely waffled.
[Guest]: No, it's okay. I it's nice to get to know you. There are some things, you know, I've
[Guest]: known you a long time. And even I know, don't know some of these things about you. Probably
[Guest]: because most of the times we're talking about something very specific, you and I are both
[Guest]: introverts. We don't like just randomly call each other and chit chat. It's usually about
[Guest]: an argument or something we're reading. So it is very nice to hear you think aloud, you
[Guest]: know, and I and I hope that the listeners also appreciate it. So we are following the
[Guest]: scene in the unseen format, almost to the T, we're about an hour and change into recording.
[Guest]: And we have just about scratched the surface of, you know, your personal journey, all the
[Guest]: roads that you took some some of the roads that you did not take. And we haven't yet
[Guest]: gotten to the meat of the show, which is actually talking about the 200th episode, and your
[Guest]: journey of, you know, life as a podcaster. But before I get to that, I want to have a
[Guest]: quick commercial break. And when we come back, we will talk more about podcasting, I promise.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who not only loves to read, but also wants to write better? If
[Amit Varma]: so, I have something for you. Since April this year, I've been teaching an online course
[Amit Varma]: called the art of clear writing for webinars spread out over four Saturdays, in which I
[Amit Varma]: share whatever I've learned about the craft and practice of writing over 25 years as a
[Amit Varma]: professional writer. The course also contains many writing exercises, discussions on email
[Amit Varma]: and WhatsApp and much interactivity. It costs rupees 10,000 or $150. You can check out the
[Amit Varma]: details at India uncut.com slash clear writing. This link will be in the show notes. If you
[Amit Varma]: want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the words on the page, then
[Amit Varma]: the art of clear writing might be just what you need. December batches begin on Saturday
[Amit Varma]: 5th December. So hurry and register before then. India uncut.com slash clear writing.
[Guest]: Welcome back to the show. Welcome back from the break. And I am Shruti Rajagopalan and
[Guest]: I'm speaking with Amit Verma to celebrate the 200th episode of the scene and the unseen
[Guest]: which I presume is your favorite podcast because you're still here. Right? So, Amit, just before
[Guest]: we get into your journey as a podcaster and some details about you know, the various episodes
[Guest]: and your thinking behind it. Are you doing anything to celebrate the 200th episode?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, like I mentioned in the introduction, we've got some merchandise out which are these
[Amit Varma]: nifty mugs, you know, which you can see on the merchandise page, you can just go to seen
[Amit Varma]: unseen.in slash stuff. And I'll also be linking to them on Twitter, etc. And they'll be in
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. And besides that, of course, there is again, as I mentioned in the introduction,
[Amit Varma]: the four volume anthology that's coming out four volumes of the scene and the unseen across
[Amit Varma]: these four different themes, politics, history, economics, and society and culture, and I
[Amit Varma]: guess economics and policy. But yeah, so you know, hopefully like big ass books which excerpts
[Amit Varma]: with many of the insights and many of the things that I have learned from the show over
[Amit Varma]: this period of time. So those are like pretty exciting now that all of these things are
[Guest]: happening. I'm going to come back to the the four volumes and the books a little bit later.
[Guest]: But I do want to say I love the merch. I got a sneak peek at it. And I love the one from
[Guest]: our episode on COVID. I told you and you know, we, we discovered later that you didn't know
[Guest]: that Rodin is one of my favorite sculptors. And I love that that particular one of the
[Guest]: thinking man. In fact, one of my favorite places in the world is the Rodin Museum and
[Guest]: the sculpture garden in Paris. So I'm really thrilled about that.
[Amit Varma]: I should in fact interrupt here and say that, you know, when I teach my writing class, I
[Amit Varma]: bring up Rodin there as well. Because I talk about how editing and writing are basically
[Amit Varma]: the same thing. And the example I give is of Rodin coming up with the thinker where
[Amit Varma]: when he conceived of the thinker, he's not creating it out of thin air. He's taking a
[Amit Varma]: block of stone and then he's editing that block of stone. So writing and editing really
[Amit Varma]: amount to the same thing. So Rodin comes up there as well, you'll be pleased to know.
[Guest]: Yeah. And in this case, he's wearing a mask, I believe. And you know, the other one is
[Guest]: the the puzzle that makes up the Indian flag. I think that's another one of my favorite
[Guest]: visuals that you've had accompanying the episodes. So I'm very excited about the merchandise.
[Guest]: I don't know when I will be next in India and get access to it. But but you know, it's
[Guest]: going to be soon for the rest of you who are listening in India. Well, you're lucky. Right.
[Guest]: I want to now start talking a little bit about the podcast. So I want to start right at the
[Guest]: beginning. What made you start the scene and the unseen?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So I mean, like I sort of mentioned in the intro, what really happened was that
[Amit Varma]: this friend of mine called Amit Doshi, who runs IBM podcasts, podcasting network approached
[Amit Varma]: me and said, Will you do something with us? And I said, Oh, I don't listen to podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: I can't think of anything. Listen, I have this interesting idea for which I could thought
[Amit Varma]: I'll someday do a YouTube show of called the seed and the unseen, which is about the unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequences of public policy. So he liked the name, he liked the concept, he said, Let's
[Amit Varma]: do that. And that's that was really the concept behind the show that you take a little bit
[Amit Varma]: of piece of public policy and you talk about that. In fact, we we did pilot episodes on
[Amit Varma]: the minimum wage, but I never ended up ever doing an episode on the minimum wage, which
[Amit Varma]: is interesting because it moved away from public policy and became more about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: these deep dive interviews into ideas and lives and history and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So what what really happened then was that over a period of time, it just evolved along
[Amit Varma]: with my own intellectual curiosity and the journeys I wanted to take. And I figured out
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, longer is better. And I learned a number of different things about audio along
[Amit Varma]: the way, which, you know, I've explored a great length in my podcasting course, but
[Amit Varma]: I'll briefly sort of go over some of that. One is that audio is different from other
[Amit Varma]: mediums because of the way people consume it. Like if you're watching a YouTube video,
[Amit Varma]: it's probably on your laptop or phone and you can click away to another tab or look
[Amit Varma]: away or press the back button or whatever. People will typically consume audio when they
[Amit Varma]: are either commuting, working out or doing errands, like washing dishes, for example,
[Amit Varma]: which was a use case for so many of us during the lockdown. Now, what that means is that
[Amit Varma]: either a captive audience have chosen to be a captive audience and not going to be distracted.
[Amit Varma]: The primary thing they are doing is something else, but it's automatic. It doesn't require
[Amit Varma]: the brain. So therefore they are sort of listening. Secondly, which is very different, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because in no other thing, you have a captive audience like this. It's only audio. Secondly,
[Amit Varma]: people are listening at higher speeds. And the reason for this is that while our brain
[Amit Varma]: can allow us to speak at a natural rate of between 150 to 200 words up to 225, we can
[Amit Varma]: listen from 275 to 500, which is why, you know, it's difficult to hold someone's attention
[Amit Varma]: when you're talking to them because they've got spare attentional capacity and they can
[Amit Varma]: do other things while they're listening to you, which is also why people can listen at
[Amit Varma]: higher speeds because they can actually take it in. So it's not like squeaky squeaky. It
[Amit Varma]: normalizes very fast. People will take it to 1.25, 1.5 and it will just normalize. And
[Amit Varma]: so these two things are coming together. It's passive listening. They're listening while
[Amit Varma]: doing something else. So they're a captive audience and they're listening at double speed.
[Amit Varma]: So when you do a 20 minute episode, by the time the guy has put his shoelaces on to go
[Amit Varma]: jogging, which might take 10 minutes, the episode is over. Right. So when I started
[Amit Varma]: kind of working out and listening to podcasts at the same time, I realized that if I'm out
[Amit Varma]: for an hour, a two hour episode is perfect for me. The third sort of learning that comes
[Amit Varma]: from this is that people have great hunger and desire to for deep content that typically,
[Amit Varma]: you know, first of all, it is true in a sense that we live in the age of short, the short
[Amit Varma]: attention span, but the opposite is also true. And it is not true that there are shallow
[Amit Varma]: people and there are deep people. It is that we contain multitude. So within each of us,
[Amit Varma]: there is a shallow me and a deep me. And you know, so the shallow me might be surfing TV
[Amit Varma]: channels or, you know, I'll have 50 tabs open on Chrome at the same time. But the deep me
[Amit Varma]: also craves deep learning and deep knowledge. Now, the thing is, many of us may not have
[Amit Varma]: the time to actually listen to books in our daily lives. How much time do we have? How
[Amit Varma]: much time are we going to devote to reading? But because we listen to audio while doing
[Amit Varma]: something else, we are more likely to take in knowledge that way, which is why I often
[Amit Varma]: say that, you know, audio books and printed books are not really competing with each other.
[Amit Varma]: They're entirely different use cases. So a lot of people, therefore, like getting their
[Amit Varma]: sort of deep sense or rather fulfill their hunger for depth by listening to audio, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's audio books or podcasts. Now, this is one aspect of it. Now, the thing is that,
[Amit Varma]: as I said earlier, podcasts are different from radio. It's not just radio on demand.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a reason for that as well, which is that let's think about this concept of
[Amit Varma]: space in media. Let's for a moment, look at visual media, that when you go to a cinema
[Amit Varma]: theater to watch a movie, there's a certain distance between you and the screen. And similarly,
[Amit Varma]: on the other side of the screen, there's a certain distance between the camera and the
[Amit Varma]: actors. You know, they are much further away. Then when you come to the television age,
[Amit Varma]: you're in your living room and the TV is across the room, it's a couple of meters away, and
[Amit Varma]: there's a distance between you and the TV. And similarly, the shot on the TV has become
[Amit Varma]: closer and you have sitcoms and everybody's in a room and it's closer. Similarly, if you're
[Amit Varma]: watching a YouTube video on your laptop, if it's a made for YouTube video, again, the
[Amit Varma]: two distances correlate to each other. Now, think of the distance in terms of audio that
[Amit Varma]: when you're listening to radio, say you're in your car or whatever, and you're listening
[Amit Varma]: to radio, there is a certain distance, but podcasts are in your head. They're literally
[Amit Varma]: in your head. It's the most intimate medium that there is. It's a one-on-one conversation.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a reason, this is a critical reason why, a critical difference between podcasts
[Amit Varma]: and radio, that in radio, in a sense, you're broadcasting, you're speaking to many people.
[Amit Varma]: In audio, you're not doing that. You're speaking to one person. So you can take that tone,
[Amit Varma]: which is why I say that many of the qualities that make for good radio, like, oh, radio
[Amit Varma]: voice and diction and you must speak like this, do not apply to podcasts at all. You
[Amit Varma]: don't need a good voice. You don't need an accent. You don't, it's an intimate one-on-one
[Amit Varma]: conversation, which, you know, makes it such an incredible medium. And, and, and when you're
[Amit Varma]: listening to people for like two hours a week, three hours a week, or whatever, when you
[Amit Varma]: do with a long episodes, then you have that sense of relating to that person, also trusting
[Amit Varma]: that person, respecting that all of those things, you know, all the podcasts that I
[Amit Varma]: listened to, you know, you and I both, you know, admire someone like Russ Roberts, or
[Amit Varma]: we'll listen to Tyler Carvin, who you're fortunate enough to work with and meet regularly. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so there is, you feel like you have a stake in those shows. It's not just their
[Amit Varma]: shows, it's also your show, in a sense of speaking, and they are merely the custodians
[Amit Varma]: of it in a manner and podcasts have that kind of intimacy, which makes it such a such a
[Amit Varma]: sort of remarkable and special medium.
[Guest]: Absolutely. You know, it's, like I said, at the beginning of the show, I was a bit of
[Guest]: a naysayer initially, because I just couldn't imagine why anyone would find it interesting
[Guest]: to hear me and Amit speak to each other, because we talk like this with each other all the
[Guest]: time. And we were like, now we're just recording it. Like, there's no music, there's no script,
[Guest]: there's no jokes, there's no punchline. So I was a big, you know, critic in the beginning.
[Guest]: But over the 199 episodes, and I've been on the show more than a dozen times, ha, take
[Guest]: that Vivek Kaur, but I've been on the show, you know, a number of times. And when I have
[Guest]: come to India, and I have met people who know me through the show, and that number keeps
[Guest]: increasing, they will literally quote things I have said in the show back to me, which
[Guest]: I'm always just, you know, so surprised by one because I never I don't like listening
[Guest]: to my own voice. I've never heard any of the episodes you and I have done with each other.
[Guest]: And second, I just don't remember them. Like, you know, I'm in that moment, I'm having that
[Guest]: conversation with you. And I don't remember exactly what I said, I've had a couple of
[Guest]: people correct me, you know, you said this, and we went and looked this up. But you know,
[Guest]: it's actually that. And I find that really incredible one that someone would care so
[Guest]: deeply, they would remember things one said they would quote one back to oneself, you
[Guest]: know, things like that. But the other part of it was also that we live in the information
[Guest]: age, but there is almost too much information, right. And in that sense, what you bring to
[Guest]: the table, aside from the intimate conversation is, you are curating, I know that it's the
[Guest]: other person living in your household, who is the curator, but you are also an intellectual
[Guest]: curator of sorts, right? Like you, you are really reading so much and cherry picking
[Guest]: and presenting and saying, Hey, you one really must reach in my book, right? Or one must
[Guest]: really read this thing about the Gita Press that no one may have heard of before that.
[Guest]: So in that sense, a lot of people are also listening, not because of I mean, in addition
[Guest]: to the things you mentioned, it is passive, it doesn't compete. But it's because they
[Guest]: may not know what to read yet. Right? Because they may not have had time to go to the bookstore
[Guest]: or browse, you know, do things like what you and I do, or, in your case, in my case, we're
[Guest]: particularly privileged because we get early manuscripts of people's, you know, working
[Guest]: drafts, I routinely get review copies from book publishers. So you and I get to read
[Guest]: very differently sample very differently for most people. And that is also something I
[Guest]: learned about the show that Amit Verma is not just someone they listen to for information.
[Guest]: It's also someone they listen to, to tell them what is worth listening to what is worth
[Guest]: reading, what is worth thinking about in the world. And I don't think that can be done
[Guest]: quite as easily in the written format. You know, you can put out a blog post on India
[Guest]: uncut tomorrow, 20 books, one must read today, it will have nowhere close to the impact that
[Guest]: discussing those 20 books over, you know, the podcast medium has, I'll tell you why.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one reason, of course, is that I'm sort of, I kind of follow my own intellectual
[Amit Varma]: journey. And, you know, just take the listeners along with that. So I'm not really thinking
[Amit Varma]: that I'm not thinking of it as a curatorial function, I'm following my own journey. And
[Amit Varma]: that curatorial thing becomes a default thing. But the other aspect is that, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: read a book review, what is it, it's 800 words, you know, even if you read a long essay on
[Amit Varma]: a book, a long read on a book, it's like 3-4,000-5,000, whatever, that's, that's about it. But a scene
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen episode can be, you know, is usually over 20-25,000 words, which are consuming
[Amit Varma]: in a short period of time, like my episode with Karthik Muralidharan was not just the
[Amit Varma]: longest episode of the scene in the unseen so far, maybe this will break that record.
[Amit Varma]: But it was also, he speaks at 1.5x, right? And so I got that episode transcribed, and
[Amit Varma]: it was 43,000 words. Now, where are you going to get 43,000 words of directed conversation?
[Amit Varma]: Not just a person talking, but a conversation that is directed in interesting directions
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. And that's, again, something that makes podcasting different
[Amit Varma]: from radio. Radio, because of all the imperatives, has to stay broad and shallow. You've paid
[Amit Varma]: a license fee, you've got a radio station, one, you have you recoup your money through
[Amit Varma]: advertising. So you go for lowest common denominator, which is why FM in India is so horrendously
[Amit Varma]: bad. But even otherwise, even if there were no entry barriers, you are catering to broad
[Amit Varma]: audiences. And therefore you can't go too deep, like who's interested in an argument
[Amit Varma]: on how India's First Amendment came about, and all of those things. You'd rather talk
[Amit Varma]: about Bollywood and cricket and gossip and all of that. Podcasting allows you to go deep
[Amit Varma]: to find what Kevin Kelly calls a thousand true fans, that there are plenty of people
[Amit Varma]: out there who are interested in deep knowledge, interested in books. Maybe they don't know
[Amit Varma]: where to look. Maybe they don't know there are others like them, you know, and maybe
[Amit Varma]: they don't. And suddenly you give them access to these kind of discussions with the author.
[Amit Varma]: And not just those, you know, every author that I've spoken to will probably have videos
[Amit Varma]: on YouTube where somebody speaks to them for 20 minutes or 30 minutes or even an hour.
[Amit Varma]: And I find them incredibly shallow. All these lit fests, they have these, you know, these
[Amit Varma]: panels where you'll have a one hour session and 40 minutes, you'll talk to four authors
[Amit Varma]: and then have Q&A. And that's incredibly shallow. You're not going deep at all. And the way
[Amit Varma]: I think of my podcasting is one, I want to go deep and two, I don't want to follow the
[Amit Varma]: news cycle. Like even if I cover something that is in the news, I'll wait for a period
[Amit Varma]: of time. And like my two most popular episodes, I was Srinath Raghavan on Kashmir and the
[Amit Varma]: CAA. And in both of those cases, I didn't release them immediately when the event happened.
[Amit Varma]: It took a couple of weeks. And I think they're like definitive and classic episodes. You
[Amit Varma]: can listen to 30 years from now. And my aim with everything that I do is I'm not just
[Amit Varma]: sort of going across space in terms of people across the world listen to me. I want to go
[Amit Varma]: across time. I want someone 30 years later to binge on my show. You know, when you were
[Amit Varma]: starting your Ideas of India podcast, one of the pieces of advice I gave you was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, do not think of what your listener will hear on episode one, think of what they
[Amit Varma]: will binge on episode 100, you know, and you want to create that for them, you want to
[Amit Varma]: create that body of work. So that was sort of my ethic towards podcasting and, and why
[Amit Varma]: it is so incredibly, you know, exciting, because, you know, you can do all of these things.
[Guest]: No, it's, it's amazing. I think one, you've also sort of cracked open the podcast space,
[Guest]: especially something which is not cricket or Bollywood, you know, the usual suspects
[Guest]: of mass podcasting. But the other is you have also sort of, I think, set the template or
[Guest]: become the role model in one sense, right? I'm, of course, in a particularly privileged
[Guest]: position that if I'm starting a podcast, I can pick up my phone call Amit Verma and say,
[Guest]: hey, I'm thinking about doing this, what do you think I should do? But for most others,
[Guest]: they've sort of started many, many of our common friends, in fact, has started their
[Guest]: podcast. And a lot of their template or the way they think about it has been informed
[Guest]: by how you think about it or how people engage with you. There were two pieces of advice
[Guest]: that you gave me three pieces of advice, actually, which really stuck with me. And one was you
[Guest]: said be yourself, because it is exhausting to be anyone else. And you can't sustain it.
[Guest]: And that is, in one sense, the only secret sauce that one brings to the table, right,
[Guest]: which is it becoming, of course, to hear all these different episodes, some are coming
[Guest]: just for CAA, some are coming to hear Manu Pillai. But the people who are coming over
[Guest]: and over again are coming for Amit Verma or are coming for Shruti Rajagopalan as, as you
[Guest]: know, you were talking about me. The second was the thing you said about think about creating
[Guest]: a bank of knowledge, you know, over a period of time. But the third thing is something
[Guest]: I have imbibed from you, not because you specifically said it to me, but just by looking at your
[Guest]: journey. You were talking about how you were frustrated, you know, at various points, is
[Guest]: this really worth doing? It takes just an enormous amount of work to put together, there's
[Guest]: no infrastructure, there is no money in it, and so on, so forth. And I realized that,
[Guest]: you know, many people say you did it for the love of doing it. I think this whole love
[Guest]: business is, you know, it's a little bit overdone. I think what the reason you did it is that
[Guest]: you also converted it into a consumption good for yourself. Right? If I do a podcast with
[Guest]: Karthik Muralidharan, I must inform myself on the education system in India. And that
[Guest]: is something that's going to broaden the horizon. And then I'll speak with Karthik. And of course,
[Guest]: Karthik will crack open anyone's brain and, you know, broaden their horizons, and so on,
[Guest]: so forth. And that is something I follow to the T, I've only done single digit, you know,
[Guest]: episode numbers so far. But I treat it as a consumption good that even if there were
[Guest]: zero people listening to the show, I get enough out of doing each show and having each conversation
[Guest]: that, you know, even if no one tuned in, I would walk away pretty happy. And once again,
[Guest]: we are in privileged positions where we don't need to do this for money, of course. So there's
[Guest]: that. But I think these are three bits of advice that I got from you, which, you know,
[Guest]: for the podcasters who are listening out there, that were just incredibly useful. The fourth
[Guest]: one came from my producer, Jeff. And you know, this is also a bit of the culture at Mercatus,
[Guest]: which is that we won't look in metrics. I actually have no clue other than the first
[Guest]: episode, how many downloads or listens my podcast got, and so on. And the rule is that
[Guest]: I won't ask and that he won't tell me until we're about, you know, six, seven months in,
[Guest]: at which point, you know, we can have a little bit of information. And the goal is that,
[Guest]: you know, the tail doesn't wag the dog, which is also something I learned from you. Don't
[Guest]: worry about the numbers. Don't worry about what is going on. Even if the numbers are
[Guest]: very few, you have 1000 genuine fans and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: No, my approach was the numbers was I don't care about the numbers. Because like I said,
[Amit Varma]: it's across time and all of that. And the quality and the amount of feedback I get is
[Amit Varma]: enough to you know, tell me that it's kind of really worth it. Just to sort of elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on the two other pieces of advice you pointed out. One as far as you know, you know, I tell
[Amit Varma]: keep telling my writing students don't use jargon and you're just saying consumption
[Amit Varma]: goods and all of that. No, I think I think one of the byproducts of my podcast is certainly
[Amit Varma]: that I enrich myself intellectually in terms of what I'm reading and in terms of the knowledge
[Amit Varma]: I'm taking in. And I appreciate that. But that's not the reason I'm doing it because
[Amit Varma]: it's a byproduct. And I the reason I do it is to be able to have these great conversations,
[Amit Varma]: but it's a great byproduct. And it's a good reason to do it if you know that matters.
[Amit Varma]: But the other one is also so important. Like I'm teaching this podcasting course. And one
[Amit Varma]: of the things I point out is, you know, people will get too obsessed with, you know, where
[Amit Varma]: is a gap in the market and what is a hole that I can fill in all of those things. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm like, don't be market obsessed. Because no matter what you try to do, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are interview podcasts are a dime a dozen interview podcasts with public policy.
[Amit Varma]: People are a dime a dozen. There are 7 billion people on this planet. There are already more
[Amit Varma]: than a million podcasts. Everything's been done. All ideas are out there. Even if you
[Amit Varma]: find a gap in the market, 20 people will fill it for you. What makes your podcast unique?
[Amit Varma]: Only one thing makes it unique. And that's you. Because nobody else is you and you are
[Amit Varma]: you. So what I therefore try to do is I'm following my own intellectual journey. I'm
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud, I am almost having no filter, in that sense, that, you know, you can listen
[Amit Varma]: to something I said in a past episode, which, you know, and say that, hey, but you know,
[Amit Varma]: that's such a silly line to go down on. And I have often changed my mind while thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud over the course of all the episodes that I've done. So yeah, I think that's, you
[Amit Varma]: know, as far as podcasting advice goes, that's, in fact, number one on my list that be authentic
[Amit Varma]: to yourself. That's the only thing that gives you a shot. And then what you end up with
[Amit Varma]: will at least be meaningful and valuable to you to that one person rather than to nobody
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: And I think this is also why, you know, very often you and I have spoken to the same people
[Guest]: or discussed the same book. And our shows have been completely different. Because one,
[Guest]: we haven't coordinated what we're doing, right, except knowing that, hey, what's coming out
[Guest]: next or something like that. But I have no clue what conversation you had with Dinyar
[Guest]: Patel, when I had the same conversation or with Viral Acharya more recently. And then
[Guest]: when I hear your conversation, and I know the one I've had, I'm like, wow, everyone
[Guest]: would think Amit and I would think along the same lines, but it's just completely different.
[Guest]: So your advice has helped me in very good stead.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And see, that's a remarkable thing that people would think that in terms of ideas,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you're probably, in a sense, ideologically, the closest person to me on the podcast. I
[Amit Varma]: disagree with everyone, but I disagree with you the least perhaps. And, and yet the episodes
[Amit Varma]: are so different. Like we and it's not that if one of us records with person X, the other
[Amit Varma]: one will listen to that episode and then avoid it. No, in fact, what's happened to us is
[Amit Varma]: you recorded with Madhav Khosla before I did, and my episode came out first, and did to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the Viral episodes where I offered to share my lines of inquiry with you. And
[Amit Varma]: you said, No, no, no, I don't want to be influenced by that, because either I'll try to avoid
[Amit Varma]: it, or I'll, you know, it might influence what comes to my mind. And so without that
[Amit Varma]: sort of foreknowledge of what the other has done, we would just go into those episodes
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, come up with entirely different results, which speaks exactly to that, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, don't, don't think of what others will think of your questions or what, you
[Guest]: know, don't game it, don't game it, don't overthink it, don't think too hard of the
[Amit Varma]: audience, be authentic to yourself, respect the audience, but don't don't, you know, ultimately,
[Amit Varma]: you got to be authentic to yourself.
[Guest]: No, absolutely. And, you know, now I want to talk a little bit about the philosophy
[Guest]: of the conversation or your philosophy of interviewing people. You spoke about this
[Guest]: quite a bit with Russ Roberts, which, by the way, I know we're not supposed to pick like
[Guest]: the most favorite episode. But while listening to a podcast, I mean, if I didn't pick my
[Unknown]: favorite episode as the one that Russ Roberts did with Amit Verma, I'm going to go to libertarian
[Guest]: hell, which might be what we're living in. But you know, who knows? Anyway, so I just
[Guest]: love the conversation you had about discourse, about the way we change, not just ourselves,
[Guest]: but also what we're putting out there in society. Like, what is it that it takes to have a good
[Guest]: conversation? That episode, for those, you know, of the listeners who may not have had
[Guest]: a chance to hear it yet, is one of my absolute favorites in all 200. But aside from that,
[Guest]: aside from, you know, just the simple art of listening and talking, what is your larger
[Guest]: philosophy of speaking with someone for the purpose of the interview or the podcast,
[Amit Varma]: not when you meet them over lunch? Yeah, I think, you know, the thing is, Stephen Covey
[Amit Varma]: once said that we don't listen to understand, we listen to respond. And I think there's a profound
[Amit Varma]: point there in the sense that that is almost Kantian in a sense, you know, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Immanuel Kant's categorical imperative warns against treating other people as a means to an
[Amit Varma]: end. Now, there is a sort of a larger conversation to be had here about do we do that in our lives,
[Amit Varma]: is everyone a means to a particular end? And I don't have a good answer for that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think much of the time that is the case, even if we think that should not be the case,
[Amit Varma]: it is the case. But I think that becoming aware of this can enrich our lives,
[Amit Varma]: treating other people as people with agency and an individuality and respecting them for that
[Amit Varma]: can enrich our lives. And part of how you do that is through listening, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you are listening to respond, you're listening for reasons of self aggrandizement that you want
[Amit Varma]: to respond because you want to win a point or you want to show people who might be listening,
[Amit Varma]: how smart you are and all of that. And therefore, I made a conscious decision that I am not going
[Amit Varma]: to do that I am going to give the person I am talking to maximum respect because it is also
[Amit Varma]: true that no matter how knowledgeable I might be, or how intelligent I might be, every single
[Amit Varma]: person in the 7 billion plus in the world knows something that I don't. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: my life can be better off if I can get them to share it with me. And so you have to give that
[Amit Varma]: respect to everyone, even someone you disagree with. So some of the sort of principles that I've
[Amit Varma]: come up with, therefore, is that you never interrupt, right? You know, I just want them
[Amit Varma]: to go with the flow of thinking. I don't like to sort of, I will not interrupt them at any point.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very rare when I do that when there is an interjection that must be made. And I will then
[Amit Varma]: guide them back to whatever they were talking about or whatever. But I might disagree very
[Amit Varma]: strongly or I might have something to say, even if they go on for 20-30 minutes, I will write
[Amit Varma]: down the points I want to make and I will make them sequentially later. So I will often say,
[Amit Varma]: when my turn comes, that okay, I have three responses to that. And I'll go through them
[Amit Varma]: one, two, three, because I'm also writing down and taking notes. But I will never interrupt,
[Amit Varma]: I let them go where they want. The other sort of trick to avoid is sort of when you have a list of
[Amit Varma]: questions prepared, and then you want to follow that order. So the other person is talking,
[Amit Varma]: but you've already tuned off and you're thinking of the segue into your next question, and you go
[Amit Varma]: down to that. And I like the conversation to flow in a natural way. And to make sure that doesn't
[Amit Varma]: happen. So obviously, I have really exhaustive notes. And I do sort of cover a lot of ground in
[Amit Varma]: those notes. And I know what are the themes I want to cover, and I make sure I cover them all,
[Amit Varma]: or as many as I can have the broader themes. But I don't try to force the order, I like to keep the
[Amit Varma]: flow of the conversation going. If they say something interesting, I can pick up on that and
[Amit Varma]: we can go a little further. And that's what I aim for. And I've been you know, because I teach this
[Amit Varma]: podcasting course, and we are recording this on the 10th, this Sunday, on the 15th, a week before
[Amit Varma]: the episode releases, I'll be giving my second webinar, which is also about talking about
[Amit Varma]: interviewing at much length. So I've been thinking about how different interviewers do this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Joe Rogan, Russ Roberts, Tyler Cowen, Sam Harris, the some of the people I've, you know,
[Amit Varma]: listened to and admired their craft for different reasons. And it's really interesting. And I think
[Amit Varma]: I'm most similar, of course, to Russ and I agree with you, that's a beautiful episode, it just
[Amit Varma]: warmed my heart to record it. And I think, you know, Russ felt similarly about it. And it was
[Amit Varma]: just a lovely episode on conversation. But that's also partly because I think we have the same sort
[Amit Varma]: of ethic towards conversation. I wish the shows were much longer, which is, I think, the one
[Amit Varma]: fundamental difference between us that we're both very respectful of the guest and we are trying to
[Amit Varma]: unpeel the layers. But you know, while we both go around as deep, I probably go broader, because I
[Amit Varma]: have that much more time to play with. And Sam Harris is a little different Joe Rogan is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, extremely different in different ways. And Tyler is brilliant, because he can ask things that
[Amit Varma]: I can't even think of, which, you know, questions and areas that I can't even conceive of. And I'm
[Amit Varma]: just wow at the question, you know, the question alone, sort of enlightens you in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: But I think what he also does is that he doesn't go enough with the flow of the conversation,
[Amit Varma]: where he will have a sequential list of things he wants to cover. And so that's a style. And it's a
[Amit Varma]: great show conversations with Tyler, these are different sort of styles. So you have to figure
[Amit Varma]: out what works for you, because you're being authentic to yourself. And I found that this
[Amit Varma]: worked the best for me to don't interrupt, give them the space, don't look for gotcha moments,
[Amit Varma]: right? I don't need to show off how smart I am. So I'm not going to, you know, keep interrupting
[Amit Varma]: to show off my cleverness or that I have done my research or whatever, I'm not going to look for
[Amit Varma]: gotcha moments that on, you know, last year, at so and so it's a time you said this, now you're
[Amit Varma]: saying this, because I don't want the conversation to be adversarial, because I want them to come
[Amit Varma]: relax to at the level where they are much more open and honest in sharing their thoughts and
[Amit Varma]: their ideas with me. And it's important not to so even when I, for example, disagree with someone,
[Amit Varma]: I will, I always state my disagreements, people don't realize this, because I'm being very polite,
[Amit Varma]: and we're not used to politeness on social media disagreements and all of that. But I state my
[Amit Varma]: disagreements, but I don't push the point. So you know, in fact, people have, I don't know if you're
[Amit Varma]: one of them, but people gave me feedback on the Arvind Subramanian episode that I didn't push back
[Amit Varma]: enough. And the thing is, I stated my disagreements. But then I don't want to push back and say, no,
[Amit Varma]: you didn't answer this properly. Or what about this? Or what about that? Because I don't want
[Amit Varma]: it to be adversarial. I'm happy to let the listener make up their own mind about what I asked and what
[Amit Varma]: he said. But beyond that, I see no point in litigating something beyond the point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And I also think that it's a little disrespectful that when the person has been generous enough with
[Amit Varma]: their time and their, you know, with the insights, and you cannot take that generosity for granted,
[Amit Varma]: to then disrespect that by, you know, taking it into other directions and showing how smart you
[Amit Varma]: are and all that. I'm saying, my philosophy is you take in all that you can from the conversation
[Amit Varma]: and whatever the disagreements are, you state them politely, and let the listeners sort of
[Amit Varma]: make up their own mind, which is why so many people have disagreed with, have come back on
[Amit Varma]: the show very often, because they enjoy that as well, given the take. So yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah. And I don't think there's anything wrong with disagreement. But you know, it's a question
[Guest]: of means and ends, right? Your show is not about holding public officeholders accountable,
[Guest]: right? This is not primetime television. Or this is not, you know, you are not, as you said,
[Guest]: litigating. The purpose of your show is to educate, you know, both oneself and, you know,
[Guest]: the broader audience. And that's, of course, the larger point of it. But also in that immediate
[Guest]: moment, be in that moment, right? Treat the other person, look in their eye, have that conversation,
[Guest]: learn something from each other, have the benefit of spontaneity, that the conversation may take
[Guest]: your mind to a place that you've never been to before. So it's not so much that I think interruptions
[Guest]: are bad or having prepared questions are bad. It's just that it doesn't fit with the goal that you
[Guest]: have in mind, right? Which is to see where this conversation might take you. And you can do that,
[Guest]: because the guests on the show are so high quality, that they need very little, you know,
[Guest]: direction or interruption and things like that. So I don't know if what you do and what Rusts does
[Guest]: can be done by many other people with many other guests. But for the kind of purpose that you
[Guest]: have in mind, I think the format just works beautifully. And also too few people, as you said,
[Guest]: the end goal is usually to can an episode in a particular way. That's the other thing I learned
[Guest]: from you. I am exactly like you, I prepare a lot of notes, I go in with like 20 pages of notes for
[Guest]: each episode. But I actually don't, you know, prep questions or read out questions, I'll usually have
[Guest]: my first question in mind. But other than that, it's like, you know, usually cracked open. And
[Guest]: that's another thing I've learned from you. And I think the joy of that, for me, has been leaving
[Guest]: myself open to be surprised in a way that it is impossible to be surprised if you go with a very
[Amit Varma]: fixed idea in mind. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, and the thing with research is I always feel under
[Amit Varma]: prepped. But I always, you know, cover very little of my prep. So here, I have a question,
[Guest]: since we talked about like, you know, how much you and I prep and the notes, there's another
[Guest]: question from Akshay Mukul, because he is prolific, not just in his books, but also in his questions
[Guest]: on on this podcast. So here is Akshay Mukul's second question. I'm always amazed with your
[Unknown]: research on diverse books, and the manner in which you make conversation freewheeling.
[Unknown]: Can you tell us what kind of homework goes before each podcast? Yeah, lovely question. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: since I got into the long form conversation, I think, see, the thing is, the challenge of doing
[Amit Varma]: a three hour conversation is exponentially tougher than say, a half an hour conversation.
[Amit Varma]: It's not that you need six times as much research, it's just exponentially tougher.
[Amit Varma]: So what I try to do is I try to like, first of all, of course, there is a selection bias
[Amit Varma]: in that I'm choosing subjects which are already interesting to me. So I'm likely to have already
[Amit Varma]: read books on them and have a certain amount of background information. But otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: the thing is, like, if I'm talking to an author, I will obviously read all his books.
[Amit Varma]: Like last week, my episode 199 was with Ambi Parmeswaran. And so I read five books by him.
[Amit Varma]: And he's actually written 10. But the other five are like case studies and things like that.
[Amit Varma]: So I read five books by him, watched a bunch of YouTube videos, took a lot of notes,
[Amit Varma]: all of that you want to read around the subject. Like for a long time, I wanted to do
[Amit Varma]: episodes on Gandhi with Ram Guha. And I read more than 30 books on Gandhi. But the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: many of them are already read, they're not specifically for the episode. So besides his
[Amit Varma]: own two books on Gandhi, I read a whole bunch else. And some of them I, you know, did a reread
[Amit Varma]: skim when the time for the episode came about. So I've often had 20-30 pages of notes on
[Amit Varma]: Microsoft Word for a particular episode. I have just recently discovered this app
[Amit Varma]: called Roam Research. And that's amazing, because it allows you to
[Amit Varma]: categorize and have nested queries and bidirectional linking. And so for the last
[Amit Varma]: two, three episodes, I've used that and really enjoyed that. So which is much better than,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Microsoft Word, where everything is one long list, and you bolded the parts.
[Amit Varma]: But when you have 20 pages of notes, it's like, very difficult also that when you're at the start
[Amit Varma]: of the show, somebody may mention, you know, some subject, which you know, your 25th question is
[Amit Varma]: about or roundabouts there. So you're quickly scrolling to it, because while it's been mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: you want to quote that relevant bit from that relevant book. And that's far easier in Roam
[Amit Varma]: Research. And, you know, all of that. So I put in a lot of research. And the idea is not so much to
[Amit Varma]: ask about all of those things. But because I think you need that background information,
[Amit Varma]: that I need, if I'm talking to someone who's going to give me deep knowledge on a subject,
[Amit Varma]: I need a certain baseline of knowledge myself, to be able to take the conversation to those sort of
[Amit Varma]: interesting places like in Akshaya's case is not just reading Akshaya's books, but I also have to
[Amit Varma]: have some awareness of the history of that time and how the Indian freedom movement was shaping
[Amit Varma]: up. And, you know, all of those other kinds of things. Despite that, I must say that Akshaya's
[Amit Varma]: book is just such a eye opener for me, because there are so many things that I didn't know in
[Amit Varma]: that, which is why such a remarkable book, there are very few books, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: have so many TIL moments, especially about one's own country. So yeah, so I put in a lot of work
[Amit Varma]: into research, which is rewarding for its own sake, I feel like I know the subject much better.
[Amit Varma]: But I often, you know, at my age, I'm in my mid 40s, almost touching 47 next month. So I sort of,
[Amit Varma]: so I forget a lot. So I forget what I've discussed in, you know, 30 episodes ago with somebody or
[Amit Varma]: whatever. But the point is that, you know, at some level, you've internalized aspects of the
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and that informs your worldview and your views on things to some extent. So So yeah,
[Amit Varma]: but I think I think that in a sense, the one unintended consequence, the unseen effect,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, of the show on my life, is to just really kickstart my reading habit again, and
[Amit Varma]: make me read a lot more. And because of that, think much more deeply about knowledge management.
[Amit Varma]: Like I was, you know, when I was doing the last class for my podcasting course, somebody also said
[Amit Varma]: I should sort of one day teach a course on knowledge management. I don't know if someone
[Amit Varma]: will be interested in that or not. But I've been getting into that because I think one of the great
[Amit Varma]: challenges I face is that when you're exposing yourself to a lot of knowledge, how do you sort
[Amit Varma]: of say build a second brain, so to say in, you know, Tiago Forte's words so that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that knowledge is sort of systemized, and it's not just diffused and lost and all of that. So
[Amit Varma]: that's, again, something that I've been thinking about. And I don't imagine I would have been
[Amit Varma]: thinking about it so much, had it not been for the work that the scene in the unseen makes me do.
[Guest]: You know, knowledge management, there are two parts to it. One is, of course,
[Guest]: knowledge management in terms of creating a record of what you're doing, right? I think,
[Guest]: in that sense, what you're doing with the four volumes of the scene and the unseen is going to
[Guest]: be this incredible, you know, resource, especially because unlike me, you don't put out the full
[Guest]: transcript, right? So it's hard for people to go back and look up things or, you know,
[Guest]: they may want to, but if they didn't have a piece of paper, because they were doing chores,
[Guest]: they couldn't get the name of the book down. So I think it's that kind of knowledge management I
[Guest]: really believe in, like, you know, just putting a body of work out there. The personal knowledge
[Guest]: management, I don't believe in that much. You know, I always tell my students this, my students
[Guest]: are always taking copious notes, you know, they're like, what is the best, you know, is Evernote
[Guest]: better or Rome research better? By the way, thanks. That's a lifesaver. I just started using it. But
[Guest]: I always tell them, think about it, internalize it. If you wanted to find it, just have faith
[Guest]: that you will be able to find it. It might take you an extra five minutes in that moment, but you
[Guest]: will be able to get it. The reason is now, unlike when you and I were studying in college and things
[Guest]: like that, everything is available on the internet. Search functions are so good. You know, our own
[Guest]: personal mobile phones and things have started getting search functions. So I think it's just
[Guest]: much easier to go back and find something. My worry with knowledge management systems is they
[Guest]: are so hard to create and maintain for personal use. I don't know if 95% of that crap I'm ever
[Guest]: going to go back and see. Now, of course, if you're doing it for a project like a book or a podcast,
[Guest]: it's a little bit different. But I think just like a general personal knowledge management system,
[Guest]: I'm I'm not a big fan of it. I think just have faith in your brain and your curiosity and your
[Guest]: ability to internalize concepts. And I think, you know, that'll take you quite far.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I'll disagree with this. Because I think our brain is not meant to
[Amit Varma]: our first disagreement on the show. I think our brain is not meant to retain information in
[Amit Varma]: systematic ways. And all of that our brain is meant to be creative and think about stuff,
[Amit Varma]: but not really retain information. And I have often find knowledge management to be frustrating. And
[Amit Varma]: I'll think of something that someone said and simply not be able to find it at all. Right?
[Amit Varma]: And no matter all the search functions and all that. And what I find is that I actually find
[Amit Varma]: Rome very helpful. Because what I'll do is every time I come across an interesting quote, maybe in
[Amit Varma]: something that I'm reading, I'll just do that bi directional think I'll put double brackets and
[Amit Varma]: quote around it. So now I have a page on Rome called quote, which includes all the quotes I've
[Amit Varma]: ever, you know, tagged in that way, which is useful. And then within that there'll be other
[Amit Varma]: similar things. So like, for example, when I was getting my podcasting course ready, I said,
[Amit Varma]: I have to read books on the history of radio, the history of audio, and blah, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: whole bunch of resources, books, videos, do all of that created a one page for that, then for each
[Amit Varma]: of them, I had these nested bits where for each book, there's this nested bit, you click it,
[Amit Varma]: it opens out, I have various insights there, I'm sort of linking them to each other. And
[Amit Varma]: just in terms of organizing my mind, it was incredibly useful. And during that process,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, part of it turned out to be useless, because most of those insights were not at all
[Amit Varma]: useful to me. And most of the insights, some of which I've shared here are not something that are
[Amit Varma]: actually written anywhere. So you know, it's just coming from my experience. But for other subjects,
[Amit Varma]: like when I research for episodes, like when I did the episode with Ambi, I had sort of like I
[Amit Varma]: had Ambi Parmeswaran is the name of a page below that I have personal then that's nested, you click
[Amit Varma]: on that it opens up it has, you know, which room of Godavari hostel in IIT Madras he was, so then
[Amit Varma]: you use little nuggets like that. And then he also relaxes and it takes a nice personal tone. When
[Amit Varma]: you bring that in, I had each of his books, I had, you know, separate nested sections for that
[Amit Varma]: within that conceptually, I have separate nested sections, I come across interesting quotes,
[Amit Varma]: because he uses quotes a lot in his book, they are now part of my larger database of quotes.
[Amit Varma]: So it's, so I find it useful for me. But you're right. I mean, you said that is good for projects,
[Amit Varma]: but not otherwise. I haven't used it long enough to be able to tell. But I think for individual
[Amit Varma]: projects, like for researching for episodes is great. But one of the things I'm going to do now,
[Amit Varma]: as I prepare my four anthologies for the seen and the unseen, is the transcripts of all my episodes,
[Amit Varma]: when they get to me, I'm going to put them all in Rome research, so that then it becomes really
[Amit Varma]: much easier to do that sort of bi-directional sort of forming connections, like I have asked so many
[Amit Varma]: times that was a liberal constitution imposed on an illiberal society. And it's very easy for me
[Amit Varma]: using tools like this to see how many people have asked it to and just bunch all the answers together
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. So I think my brain struggles with the enormous amounts of knowledge out there.
[Amit Varma]: And I think finding ways like this to kind of bring it all together is useful.
[Guest]: By the way, on the whole, you know, saying incentives a number of times or talking about
[Guest]: a liberal constitution imposed on illiberals. My biggest complaint about the scene and the
[Guest]: unseen merchandise is that it does not come with short classes, because then your listeners can't
[Unknown]: play a drinking game every time. Every time I say incentives. Amit Verma says incentives,
[Unknown]: or every time you say multitudes, we all contain multitudes, or you quote John Lennon,
[Guest]: or you talk about the liberal versus illiberal constitution. So my next suggestion for the
[Guest]: merchandise, maybe for episode 250 or 300 is we desperately need short classes to play drinking
[Guest]: games for the scene and the unseen. Now, I want to I mean, I know you have no trouble booking guests,
[Guest]: because I mean, of course, you don't have trouble booking guests. But there are a couple of
[Guest]: questions about, you know, choosing your guests. And the first question comes from someone who
[Guest]: might be one of my, perhaps one of my most favorite thinkers alive in our time. And that is
[Guest]: Pratap Bhanu Mehta. You know, I mean, I've read pretty much everything Pratap has written over
[Guest]: the years, it is just a joy to read him. He's a thinker who once again, contains multitudes,
[Guest]: right? I mean, the breadth and the depth with which he thinks about any subject is amazing,
[Guest]: how it is both historical, but it's also abstract. And it's philosophical, but it's also about a
[Guest]: contemporary issue. It's, you know, he's really one of my favorite thinkers. And I was so thrilled
[Guest]: when you got him on the scene and the unseen. I heard that episode on, you know, 1x, I didn't
[Guest]: speed it up, because I wanted it to just go on as long as it does. And like, enjoy every moment of
[Guest]: it. But Pratap was very generous and instantly responded with a question. So I'm going to play
[Guest]: Pratap's question for you. And then we'll talk a little bit more about guests on the scene and
[Unknown]: the unseen. So Amit, congratulations on your double century. And I know this is just the beginning.
[Unknown]: So one question I've always been meaning to ask you, is you have this great love for literature,
[Unknown]: and you're one of the most voracious readers of novels that I know of. So if you were doing
[Unknown]: a seance version of the scene and unseen, and you were inviting back a dead novelist for a
[Unknown]: conversation, who would that be? And what's the question you would be dying to ask them?
[Amit Varma]: Wow, what an incredible question. I think, yeah, I mean, that's, you know, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: like, I love Pratap's writing, and he's incredibly thought provoking with everything
[Amit Varma]: he writes. And I'm afraid he is thought provoking with his questions as well, because I'll have to
[Amit Varma]: think a bit to, you know, come up with this, but I'm really glad I could finally get Pratap on my
[Amit Varma]: show. Because you know, it's, you know, when I first started the scene and the unseen, I remember,
[Amit Varma]: you know, opening up the notepad on my phone and thinking about who the possible guests would be.
[Amit Varma]: And I put five names down, and then I couldn't think of any more. And Pratap was there. So I'm
[Amit Varma]: really glad we kind of crossed that one off. And hopefully, he'll be back on my show at some point
[Amit Varma]: in time without necessarily having a subject in mind just to sort of shoot the breeze as it were.
[Amit Varma]: To answer this question, as far as novelists are concerned, well, you know, I'll cheat a bit,
[Amit Varma]: I'll say George Orwell. But what I really love about George, as I said that Shruti held up a
[Amit Varma]: piece of paper on which she had written George Orwell, so she guessed it. But again, my admiration
[Amit Varma]: for Orwell is not so much for his novels, which is why it is a bit of a cheat, but really his
[Amit Varma]: nonfiction writing, especially his remarkable collected essays, which is just so incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And every time I'm stuck writing a piece, I'll, you know, open that and read three,
[Amit Varma]: four essays by him on whatever subject, it doesn't matter. And just the rhythms of the language
[Amit Varma]: that he uses will get my brain working properly again. So I love Orwell. Now, what would I ask
[Amit Varma]: him? I think I would ask him that. I mean, he was already, I think by the time he died,
[Amit Varma]: disillusioned with the extreme left by that time, even though you could call him a man of the left.
[Amit Varma]: And I would ask him that, you know, if he had, presumably, if he comes back in a seance,
[Amit Varma]: and as a ghost, he's been witnessing everything that's been happening since in some depth,
[Amit Varma]: that has that disillusionment deepened, what does he feel now? And, you know, would he be
[Amit Varma]: more likely to agree with his contemporary higher who I don't think that the two ever would have
[Amit Varma]: met or known each other or even written about each other. So maybe just use the world because
[Amit Varma]: it's interesting seeing his views evolve over a period of time. And I think Orwell was one of the
[Amit Varma]: greatest, you know, he threw his novels, he looked into the future. I mean, the warnings against
[Amit Varma]: totalitarianism and statism that his novels contain is second to none. And even today,
[Amit Varma]: you know, especially people keep talking about 1984. And how, you know, this combination of
[Amit Varma]: state power and technology could be bringing about something that makes what was once a dystopian
[Amit Varma]: seem not so outlandish after all. And I'd ask a little bit about that, because I think that
[Amit Varma]: he would have seen clearly enough to sort of, you know, be able to paint that crisp picture
[Amit Varma]: where you realize that this sort of totalitarianism and statism doesn't come either from the left or
[Amit Varma]: the right, it comes from both places. And in a sense, it comes from the same instinct of imposing
[Amit Varma]: your vision of the world on others. And I'd be very interested in seeing how his thinking would
[Amit Varma]: have evolved over these, you know, these sort of last 70 years. But that's a bit of a cheat,
[Amit Varma]: because my admiration for Orwell is because of his nonfiction, though I love both 1984 and Animal
[Amit Varma]: Farm. So give me a moment, let me think about whether this I am so kicked right now, while you
[Guest]: take a moment that I called it, because as soon as I heard Pratap's question, I said, I'm pretty
[Guest]: sure he's gonna say George Orwell. And then I'm pretty sure he's gonna hedge and say, you know,
[Guest]: his fiction writing is great, but you must really read his nonfiction. So I feel like I've gotten to
[Guest]: know you well, and I'm feeling very smug right now, though, for me, Animal Farm is always going
[Amit Varma]: to be very special. Yeah, it's very special. I'd love to speak to guys like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: Solzhenitsyn, or, you know, even someone like Dostoevsky, or, you know, the Japanese guys,
[Amit Varma]: Mishima, Tanizaki. But I don't know what I would ask them. I mean, for example, my,
[Amit Varma]: the literary writer at whose altar I worship is actually alive. It's Alice Munro. And I would
[Amit Varma]: not want to meet her because I would not know what to say, I would not be able to say anything,
[Amit Varma]: I would be sort of struck speechless. And there's really nothing to say. I mean, what do you say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, her craft is in a sense beyond imitation. So with novelists, I think that's the
[Amit Varma]: thing. If you ask about dead intellectuals from the past, who were thinkers or nonfiction writers,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I'd love to talk to Kant, I'd love to talk to John Locke. You know, I'd love to
[Amit Varma]: talk to Adam Smith. You know, as I know, you would and Russ Roberts would have.
[Guest]: Speaking of people from the past and people who might not be around anymore,
[Guest]: there is another one of our favorite guests, Narayani Basu, who's been on your show,
[Guest]: who wrote the wonderful book on Menon. And, you know, I want to play her question for you,
[Guest]: because I think she will give you the out from having to come up with a name other than George
[Guest]: Orwell and coming up with a question to ask a literary figure.
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit, this is Narayani. Many, many congratulations on 200 episodes. Thank you
[Unknown]: so much for making longer conversations fun again. I wanted to ask, is there anyone
[Unknown]: from any period of history? And this could be anybody, right? It could be a literary figure,
[Unknown]: a literary figure, an actor, an economist, a social reform activist, you get the picture.
[Unknown]: Anyone that you'd want to sit down with today, whether it's on or off your show and chat and why?
[Amit Varma]: Great question and a tough question. I don't really know. I mean, the easy answer and the
[Amit Varma]: name that pops to mind, and I hope you haven't written it down and you're going to wave it at
[Amit Varma]: the screen in front of me, but you have it ready. Okay. It's probably, I mean, Bastia is obviously,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the first name that comes to mind. I mean, the name of my show, the scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: is inspired by Bastia's great essay, that which is seen and that which is not seen. And his works
[Amit Varma]: are remarkable. The law is beautiful. His essays are great. The law is just a masterpiece. And
[Amit Varma]: in so many ways, I mean, the law contains so much of what, you know, it almost anticipates
[Amit Varma]: public choice theory in so many ways. And also I look at Bastia as, you know, I kind of find
[Amit Varma]: there's a certain sense of both tragedy and inspiration there that he spends those last
[Amit Varma]: years from forties to, I think he died when he was 49 or 50, much, much like Orwell. And he's
[Amit Varma]: essentially fighting a lonely battle that it's inevitable that no one agrees with him, but he's
[Amit Varma]: putting his ideas out there because it is important to do so. And in a sense, he's again, not writing
[Amit Varma]: across space, he's writing across time, because, which is why someone like me, you know, a century
[Amit Varma]: and a half later can be inspired by him. And, you know, of course, I've won two prizes named after
[Amit Varma]: him, but that's orthogonal. And, but someone like me can be inspired by him and can, you know, find
[Amit Varma]: value in doing just that. And it also tells you that, you know, the fact that that battle was
[Amit Varma]: never won that, you know, which he was fighting, which is for individual rights and agency and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, controlling the power of the state and even understanding it was something that
[Amit Varma]: was never won and may never be won, but you have to keep fighting the good fight and sort of
[Amit Varma]: working on that. So I find him inspiring for that reason. The thing is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you ask a hypothetical question of if you could talk to someone from the past novelist or
[Amit Varma]: otherwise, and ask them a question or whatever, the thing is, like I said, I'm so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: private and introverted and whatever is that I probably wouldn't want to meet them. I would,
[Amit Varma]: I would just, you know, like, what would one say with Bastia? Of course, I'd love to do an episode
[Amit Varma]: of the scene and the unseen with Bastia, like what is a French parliament like, do your friends
[Amit Varma]: mock you for your views, like my friends mock me, and all of that, you know, and I would have tried
[Amit Varma]: to get a human sense of that battle, sort of the loneliness of the battle, because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I can reach out to many other people who think like me across the world, and I have that access
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But, you know, Bastia would not have had that. So then what kind of keeps you
[Amit Varma]: going? In a sense, I think I somehow in some strange way managed to make this about me.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, I mean, Bastia is interesting. Adam Smith is, of course, interesting when you just
[Amit Varma]: see the sort of the breadth of his work in just those two books, a journey from a theory of moral
[Amit Varma]: sentiments to, you know, the wealth of nations, just in sort of that journey and how much he
[Amit Varma]: covers. And of course, you know, Russ Roberts, and I spoke a bit about Adam Smith in our episode,
[Amit Varma]: and he's written a great, lovely book on Adam Smith, which I recommend everyone
[Amit Varma]: goes out and reads. Adam Smith would have been interesting, Locke would have been interesting.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and I think had he lived today, he would have refined his ideas to a much
[Amit Varma]: finer degree. But to think that a man like that wrote, you know, works like that when he did is
[Amit Varma]: just remarkable. Apart from that, yeah, I should, you know, I'll be accused of being non-Sanskari
[Amit Varma]: if I can't name Indian figures. I would have loved to hang out with Kabir, just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just, you know, talk about poetry and sort of, you know, how he thinks of language, and how
[Amit Varma]: sort of all of those sort of different things. And I haven't done enough episodes
[Amit Varma]: on that. I mean, I kind of should, but Kabir would have been fun. Even, you know, I did an
[Amit Varma]: episode with Amardeep Singh on the travels of Guru Nanak and Nanak Banti. And Nanak is a very
[Amit Varma]: Kabir like figure, a very interesting person, not just someone who founded a religion, but
[Amit Varma]: a very interesting, deep thinker. So again, I would have liked to hang out, maybe just be a fly
[Amit Varma]: on the wall and maybe travel around a little bit with someone like that, not necessarily do an
[Amit Varma]: episode and get gyan, because I think there is something beyond intellectual gyan and just
[Amit Varma]: discussing ideas. But, you know, just maybe travel around and, you know, as far as travels are
[Amit Varma]: concerned, I am notorious for being the kind of person who, you know, I don't like to walk very
[Amit Varma]: much. And I don't, I'm not the explorer kinds. I'm like, you know, book me into a comfortable
[Amit Varma]: place. I want to chill and relax, because that is what vacations are for. But I think it would
[Amit Varma]: be different if I was hanging out with either Nanak or Kabir or any of these guys. And maybe
[Amit Varma]: I'd be live blogging while I was with them. Like, you know, after the tsunami had struck in 2004,
[Amit Varma]: I'd, as you'd know, I'd gone along the coast of Tamil Nadu and those were early days in my blog,
[Amit Varma]: and I was posting updates every day. And that was in a different way or sort of a very, it was
[Amit Varma]: interesting. And I'm glad I did that. It was difficult also, you know, like at Nagapattinam,
[Amit Varma]: and I wrote about this for Rediff also, but, you know, just in a field where you have dead
[Amit Varma]: bodies all around you and kind of walking through them. And at some point it normalizes in your
[Amit Varma]: brain and you don't think of them as, you know, former people, so to say. But it's interesting.
[Guest]: I don't know if I've told you this before, but that's how I found you, through the tsunami
[Guest]: coverage on your blog. Because I was there at the same time in Nage district.
[Guest]: Yeah, I had a break from, you know, as you know, it happened between Christmas and New Year. And
[Guest]: there is, you know, the term break, and just figured out that, you know, things need to be
[Guest]: done. So I got on an unreserved ticket and just went to Tamil Nadu. And then, you know, figured
[Guest]: it out from there and joined a volunteer group. And they placed me in a tiny village called Kutty
[Guest]: Andir, which is in Nage district. And so not very far from where you were blogging. And your blog
[Guest]: was really lovely. It was one of the very few sort of, you know, I mean, now we have all the blogs
[Guest]: and the live tweets and all those things going on. But at that time, it was very unique to get that,
[Guest]: you know, instant, not just news, but also reflections, you know, that was an odd thing
[Guest]: that was going on at the time. So that's how I found you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I was also trying to, I think, look in a different way, if that makes sense,
[Amit Varma]: like not just look at events and talk to people and ask about the experience. But like, I remember
[Amit Varma]: when we went through village after village, and I found that in different places, the watches,
[Amit Varma]: the clock stopped at a different time. And you could make out by the last time on these time
[Amit Varma]: pieces across all these villages across the shore, when the waves had hit. And that's so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: poignant and almost heartbreaking, because it carries with it the loss of life and the loss
[Amit Varma]: of so much, you know, it's just so yeah, and at some level, I wish I'd done a little bit more of
[Amit Varma]: that, that kind of reporting. And in that sense, you could say I didn't take the initiative enough
[Amit Varma]: in some ways, that I was just like a death bound person per se, which is what I even am for the
[Amit Varma]: seen in the unseen, right? I'm just like, you know, sitting in a studio or during the lockdown
[Amit Varma]: at a mic in my room, and just talking to people and not really out there. But perhaps in this case,
[Amit Varma]: I think this is the value that I can create now. So it sort of makes sense. And I was but at that
[Amit Varma]: time, I think I should have gone out more and I was probably too lazy.
[Guest]: You know, the the timepiece part that you mentioned another really poignant moment I had,
[Guest]: when this was happening is, you know, one, the first act of, you know, any kind of relief work
[Guest]: is obviously clearing rubble and making sure you know, people have food and things like that.
[Guest]: And by the time I reached the village, most of the, you know, sort of the dead had been found
[Guest]: and sort of disposed in whatever manner was, you know, possible or appropriate at the time.
[Guest]: But there was this one place where the dwelling structure had really caved in. And clearly,
[Guest]: someone had been trapped in there, and they hadn't found the body. But obviously, it had
[Guest]: decomposed to such an extent that there was a stench. And then, you know, people were called
[Guest]: in to move the rubble and things like that. And the only thing that hadn't decomposed was the
[Guest]: polyester sari, you know, and the thought that someone's, you know, I mean, this must have cost
[Guest]: 100 rupees or less, right. And the idea that this polyester sari is in some sense more durable
[Guest]: than human life, which can just be so fragile in a disaster like this, that like that that picture
[Guest]: has never left me. And you know, I can if I close my eyes, I can just I can see that rubble and I
[Guest]: can, I can see the sari. So that was an eye opening experience for sure.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. And so you know, one of the things that you know, so I mentioned this watches thing
[Amit Varma]: in a recent episode, I think with Nilesh Mishra. And then when I was linking that post from my
[Amit Varma]: show notes, I went back to all the posts I'd written during that period. And I'd realized
[Amit Varma]: and I'd realized how unformed my thinking otherwise was, how naive I was in my faith that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the state could have sorted this out with better regulation, there would have been
[Amit Varma]: less life lost, and we needed sterner coastal laws and a bunch of other things, which over time I,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I had reason to think about deeper and say that, okay, that was misformed that I just
[Amit Varma]: sort of intentions and not probable outcomes and the way the political economy actually works and
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah. So it's interesting also to see one's own journey through that past and realize
[Amit Varma]: how about, you know, one's opinions were just wrong about so many things, but, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: even during the scene in the unseen, I think there's a sort of a mirroring of that where I
[Amit Varma]: remember I did that episode with Akar Patel on, you know, the intellectual foundations of Hindutva,
[Amit Varma]: which I remember you saying at the time that you really loved that as well. And that was a great
[Amit Varma]: episode. But both of us were of the opinion at the time of that episode. And, you know, my view
[Amit Varma]: before it, in fact, very firmly was that there is nothing there, there is no intellectual tradition.
[Amit Varma]: And whatever claims to be an intellectual tradition is just a cover for a Makota for
[Amit Varma]: bigotry and all of those other things. And later in the course of doing episodes with
[Amit Varma]: people like Akshay Mukul, you know, that episode then tells you that there is a tradition. And the
[Amit Varma]: reason many people like me are missing that tradition is because we read in English,
[Amit Varma]: where those arguments aren't made in English, but there is a rich tradition in Hinduism.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you may not agree with that intellectual tradition, but it is coherent and cogent and it
[Amit Varma]: exists. And, you know, chatting with people like Akshay Mukul and Rahul Verma, and others sort of
[Amit Varma]: made me realize that in that regard, I was I was wrong. And I needed to have a more nuanced view.
[Amit Varma]: And that that view reflected my own shortcomings as someone who read mainly in English,
[Amit Varma]: rather than, you know, something that was actually the truth.
[Guest]: You know, I want to since you talk both about the blogging days and now, I want to play the
[Guest]: next question from again, one of our common friends and, you know, ace podcaster and writer.
[Guest]: This is Pranay Kothasthani. And, you know, he's been on on your show multiple times.
[Guest]: He's just a wonderful thinker and intellectual. I always enjoy reading him. I love listening to him.
[Guest]: So, I'm going to play this next question from Pranay and then take this conversation forward.
[Unknown]: Hey, Amit, Pranay here. Many, many congratulations for doing what you do
[Unknown]: and for inspiring so many of us to get into podcasting. Now, here's my question for you.
[Unknown]: You've been both a podcaster and a writer. So, what do you think are the comparative
[Unknown]: advantages of both? Similarly, from the consumer's end, what do you think are the
[Unknown]: comparative advantages of podcast listening over reading, if any?
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic question. And I share your admiration of Pranay and I know him fairly well, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when I all the times when I was editing Pragati, he's, of course, part of
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila and he wrote a lot for me and just a wonderful, warm human being, you know, such a
[Amit Varma]: good person that you think that, you know, it's, you know, the correlation of great thinker and
[Amit Varma]: good person is surely not common. And so you imagine that such a nice guy cannot possibly be
[Amit Varma]: a fine thinker. But I think he's just one of the finest, sharpest thinkers about policy that I
[Amit Varma]: personally know, you know, really, you know, he's such a humble, down to earth guy that it's hard
[Amit Varma]: to sort of think of him as someone on a pedestal. But as an intellectual, he is on a pedestal for
[Amit Varma]: me. And he does a great Hindi podcast, Pulya Bazi, which is wonderful. I have been a guest
[Guest]: I have been a guest on that show. And I had, I was just sweating and so nervous, because I've
[Guest]: never thought about property rights concepts in Hindi, I didn't even know the right words.
[Guest]: And he and Saurabh sort of held my hand through it. But I feel like I interact with Pranay a lot
[Guest]: because of the newsletter and the sub stack. And it's, I just look forward to it every time it,
[Guest]: you know, shows up in my inbox. I think he's doing an incredible job.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I was also in Pulya Bazi talking in Hindi about Hayek. So yeah, that was that was
[Amit Varma]: good fun. Pranay is great. And his newsletter is great, co-written with Raghu Jaitley,
[Amit Varma]: whose real name I know, but shall not reveal, though I never met him.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, yes. Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, really? You didn't know that? Okay. Yes. Yeah, bragging rights.
[Amit Varma]: So I have bragging rights.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So these, these great questions. And I think the short answer to the difference between
[Amit Varma]: writing and podcasting is really breadth versus depth, in the sense that, you know, as far as
[Amit Varma]: reading, writing is concerned, you can just read a lot. And you can read a lot about a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: different subjects, and you can get breadth that way. Whereas the best podcasts go deep into one
[Amit Varma]: specific thing. And obviously, if you're listening to different episodes or different podcasts,
[Amit Varma]: you're getting a certain amount of breadth that way. But writing doesn't allow you to go as deep
[Amit Varma]: as podcasting does. Like I said, my episode with on education with Karthik Muralitharan was 43,000
[Amit Varma]: words when it was transcribed, which at double speed, you could have listened to in one and a
[Amit Varma]: half hours. You know, that's almost a short book. That's a monograph. You know, how are you going
[Amit Varma]: to consume that and get, you know, that many words, you know, in that much time? And where
[Amit Varma]: are you? And that's like a sharp, focused kind of discussion that is happening. You know, an
[Amit Varma]: interview of Karthik in a newspaper would be 800 words, even in a long interview in something like
[Amit Varma]: caravan would be 7-8000 words at most. And here you have 43,000 words. And I think in one word,
[Amit Varma]: I think that's the main difference, which is why one has to sort of embrace length. And I'll
[Amit Varma]: pat myself on the back a little bit for this. Because I think when I started growing long,
[Amit Varma]: you could say, I shifted the Overton window of length in Indian podcasting, that, you know, now,
[Amit Varma]: interviews, which last one, one and a half hours are perfectly common, especially, you know, among
[Amit Varma]: the policy podcasts and all of that. And that really wasn't the case. You know, it's like a
[Amit Varma]: string that I remember that I just kept lifting it. And I have so many three hour episodes now,
[Amit Varma]: including presumably this one by the time it's out, that a one hour episode feels like nothing
[Amit Varma]: at all. And I'm sort of happy about that. The other aspect of that, and I don't know what the
[Amit Varma]: related stat for other Indian podcasts is, but the one part, I don't look at metrics. But the
[Amit Varma]: one interesting metric that I have sort of, that gives me satisfaction about my podcast is that
[Amit Varma]: most people listen, most regular listeners listen to podcast apps on listen to podcasts on their
[Amit Varma]: podcast apps, while I still get about 30 to 40% of my listens from Chrome, which means that these
[Amit Varma]: are not regular listeners from the browser, rather. And this means these are not regular listeners.
[Amit Varma]: These are people for whom that episode of mine has acted as a gateway drug of sorts. And that's
[Amit Varma]: how they've come into it, which you know, and hopefully I'm kind of, I managed to convert some
[Amit Varma]: of them. So that gives me a lot of happiness, because I think the ecosystem is very young.
[Amit Varma]: And we are at a stage where nobody's competing with anybody else. We just want to grow the
[Amit Varma]: listening habit among people. And we all benefit from that. And that's something that we need. And
[Amit Varma]: which is why I go out of my way to help people do podcasts. I've sort of, you know, as the editor of
[Amit Varma]: Pragati, I, you know, started the Pragati podcast, which Pawan Srinath does so well. And he did that
[Amit Varma]: with Hamsini for a while, she started her own podcast. And so I sort of tried to keep that
[Amit Varma]: tradition going. Even now with my podcasting course, what I sort of stressed on in the first
[Amit Varma]: class that I did, was that I don't want this to be like taking a gym membership,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I want to podcast at the end of this, I want to, you know, so let's work at that.
[Amit Varma]: So initially, I thought that the first two webinars, the total three webinars, the first two
[Amit Varma]: can be kind of conceptual, and then we get down to the nitty gritties that this is your basic
[Amit Varma]: equipment, this is how you record, blah, blah, blah. But I devoted half of my first webinar to
[Amit Varma]: the nitty gritties because I said that you got to kind of, you know, get down to it right now that
[Amit Varma]: we can't stay at the level of the abstract, we have to get down to the concrete and actually
[Amit Varma]: get things done. And I feel strongly about this because, you know, I am in a limited space in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that right now podcasts in India seem to be heard a lot by English speaking elites.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the real scope is in the languages, because there is so much more hunger for knowledge
[Amit Varma]: and information in the languages. If you if you read in English today, you can go on the internet,
[Amit Varma]: and the world of knowledge is at your fingertips, you can go to YouTube, watch the best videos,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah. But supply of that kind of knowledge and insight is so limited in the
[Amit Varma]: languages. And there is much greater hunger and scope for it. And I'd really like to see
[Amit Varma]: young entrepreneurs start podcasts, which may not cater to the same use cases, because beyond a
[Amit Varma]: certain class of society, people may not have the time to actually be working out for an hour a day.
[Amit Varma]: So when are they going to listen, but, you know, figure out different ways of distributing
[Amit Varma]: podcasts, maybe not a podcast app, maybe on WhatsApp, a guy is getting a five minute update
[Amit Varma]: every morning in Hindi, which gives perspective on what happened that day, not just news,
[Amit Varma]: or things like that, just throw things at the wall, try interesting things. Because that's where
[Amit Varma]: I think podcasts will kind of really explode and really make a difference in our society.
[Guest]: You know, the thing you mentioned about language, that's the other thing I really love about
[Guest]: podcasts, which is that even people who don't speak English as fluently, maybe as you and me,
[Guest]: because we we have the privilege of, you know, being English medium or whatever,
[Guest]: they can listen to the podcast at their own pace in their own time, you know, they can actually
[Guest]: hear how the words are said in what context they are used. Whereas, you know, normally,
[Guest]: the only access to these ideas would be through the written word, which is much harder to access
[Guest]: if, if your fluency levels are not that high. So I think, even for non English speakers, or those
[Guest]: who are perhaps less fluent, I think the podcast medium does something really interesting and
[Guest]: really special. And and you told me not to use jargon, you admonished me a few minutes, or was
[Guest]: it a few hours ago, I lost track of time. But I think there is some value to that, right? Like
[Guest]: people are also learning, we might make fun of drinking games and talking about incentives and
[Guest]: liberalism. But with us, the listeners are also learning the language of how to think about these
[Amit Varma]: ideas and how to communicate them. Yeah, first of all, let me correct you, I did not admonish you,
[Amit Varma]: I scolded you. So let us use sort of simpler words. But no, that's a that's a great point.
[Amit Varma]: And that brings me to a related sort of I thought it was little more gentle than scolding. Well,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, yeah. So I mean, there are surely simpler synonyms of admonished. So you know,
[Amit Varma]: but that's absolutely true. Because you know, a good friend of mine, I don't know if you met him,
[Amit Varma]: Yogesh Dashrath, who runs Storytel. Yeah, you haven't met Yogesh. So Yogesh who runs Storytel,
[Amit Varma]: and I've done some work for Storytel in the past. And they have this, and it's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sponsored many episodes of the scene and scene in the unseen in the past. So friends of the podcast,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, early sponsors. So Yogesh once told me and they have a great bank of Marathi and Hindi
[Amit Varma]: audiobooks. So a lot of the listeners are people who are listening to Marathi and Hindi. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: I, you know, I heard Raag Darbari there, because I'd read it in English, and I wanted to read it
[Amit Varma]: in Hindi. But I thought, let me listen to it in Hindi and it's such a masterpiece. And he told
[Amit Varma]: me that many of those listeners, we think people who listen to audio listen at higher speeds,
[Amit Varma]: he said many of his listeners, listen to the English content of Storytel at lower speeds,
[Amit Varma]: 0.75, 0.5, because that's how they understand. And that also opened my eyes. And another similar sort
[Amit Varma]: of eye opening thing that I learned recently, is that when I heard someone complaining about,
[Amit Varma]: oh, Netflix now allows you to play videos slower or faster. And he was appalled by that, because he
[Amit Varma]: said, why should someone speed it up or whatever it is made for natural speed. But then I looked
[Amit Varma]: into why that was. And I'm very impressed by the reason and why Netflix has done it. And the reason
[Amit Varma]: is that when blind people are watching shows, in a sense, they're not really watching the shows,
[Amit Varma]: they're listening to a description of what is happening, which is how they consume the content.
[Amit Varma]: And they like to speed it up, because they comprehend audio faster. So the higher speeds
[Amit Varma]: help blind people watch shows, which is such a, you know, remarkable thing. And what people who
[Amit Varma]: can't hear what they do is that they are reading the subtitles, because they can't follow the
[Amit Varma]: dialogue. And so they like to slow it down, because it takes them longer to read. So it makes
[Amit Varma]: perfect sense. And those of us who can see and hear perfectly well, don't realize this. And we
[Amit Varma]: think of our experience of the world as a normal experience. And this is the way things should be.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so you know, credit to Netflix for building this stuff into the software and just
[Amit Varma]: suddenly expanding that universe of content in such a, you know, heartwarming way.
[Guest]: No, absolutely. And I mean, one is, of course, people who are differently abled,
[Guest]: or visually impaired and things like that. But the other thing is also, we are all differently abled.
[Guest]: Also, in the sense of the background that we come from, right? I mean, when we're talking,
[Guest]: I consume monetary economics, as I learned while I researched for Viral Acharya's episode,
[Guest]: so much slower than any other subfield of economics, which is applied micro,
[Guest]: right? And I'm a professional economist, but there are capabilities I have built,
[Guest]: there are words I have learned, there are shorthands I have learned. And I think we
[Guest]: don't pay enough attention to this as we communicate, right? And the nicest thing
[Guest]: about technology, especially one that is asynchronous, like podcasting, is that people
[Guest]: can do this. And they can also do this in the privacy of their own home. Because normally,
[Guest]: when we do it in the classroom, when we do community viewing, or community listening,
[Guest]: or community education, as we do in schools, people are routinely made fun of for pronouncing
[Guest]: a word wrong, or not understanding a question the first time it is posed. Many people who lack
[Guest]: fluency skills in a particular language need that question to be posed, maybe multiple times,
[Guest]: maybe a little bit more slowly. I mean, for me, when it comes to Tamil, anything other than food
[Guest]: needs to be said, you know, a little bit more carefully and gently for me,
[Guest]: you know, especially if it's something like economics. And I think that is a lesser
[Guest]: appreciated aspect of how podcasting and video streaming can really crack open the education
[Guest]: space, even with shows that are not intending to educate, but they can educate because they've
[Guest]: built in the infrastructure to do so. No, and it's out there, because you know,
[Amit Varma]: just being out there, just being available at a certain depth is important, because we are
[Amit Varma]: surrounded today by mass media, which for a number of different reasons, and they're responding to
[Amit Varma]: different incentives and being rational, unnecessarily being shallow. Like if you look at
[Amit Varma]: the Indian news TV channels, I had a brief episode on this with Ashok Malik a long time back when I
[Amit Varma]: did short episodes. And his point was great. His point was that one, they have paid such
[Amit Varma]: license fees that the investment in a TV channel is massive. And two, you know, government
[Amit Varma]: regulations have price controls on how much they can charge subscribers. Therefore, the bulk of
[Amit Varma]: the revenue comes from advertisers. And so they need to dump it down, which is why you have the
[Amit Varma]: shouty nonsense that you see, and which is or Bollywood or Bollywood, which is why all our
[Amit Varma]: channels are functioning at a lowest common denominator, and you cannot get into any niche.
[Amit Varma]: And here is where podcast has an advantage, even over something like radio, where you can cater
[Amit Varma]: to any niche, right? And anybody can start not having an entry barrier. Like imagine if they
[Amit Varma]: were giving licenses for podcasts. One, I would never have got a license. And two, even if I
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't have applied, I wouldn't have applied. And I would never have got one. And even if I
[Amit Varma]: got one, it would have been for a different show. And some babu would have shown up at my door
[Amit Varma]: saying, you wanted to do 20 minute episodes on public policy. Now you're doing three hour
[Amit Varma]: interviews with known dissenters, what is going on. So not having an entry barrier is interesting
[Amit Varma]: in the sense is important in the sense that people can then follow their own interests,
[Amit Varma]: and often surprise themselves with how many people share those interests. And just having
[Amit Varma]: the knowledge available out there is really kind of important. So yeah, I agree with you. It's just
[Guest]: stunning. You know, one element we've been talking about is the technological infrastructure,
[Guest]: which makes us more able communicators using the podcast medium. The other is content. And here I
[Guest]: want to, you know, talk about another question from our guest or rather queue another question
[Guest]: from one of your guests and one of our common friends, who is Kumar Anand. Right. And I think,
[Guest]: you know, we've had some fantastic conversations one on one and the three of us together. And he's
[Guest]: been on your show. And he's talked about especially agriculture, and agricultural reforms,
[Guest]: which is more recently an area which after, you know, so many years has cracked open. So maybe
[Guest]: you and Kumar had a little bit of something to do with cracking open that space. I don't know
[Guest]: how far and wide the podcast reach can go. But I just want you to hear this question from Kumar
[Guest]: on the content and communication. Hi, Amit. Congratulations on this
[Unknown]: great milestone. I used to think of you as the Dan Carlin of Indian podcasting,
[Unknown]: but I've changed my mind. I now think Dan Carlin is the Amit Verma of podcasting.
[Unknown]: Anyways, here's my question. You have now done 199 episodes of the seen and unseen
[Unknown]: in your episodes. On several occasions, you have dealt with issues with elements
[Unknown]: that are difficult to communicate to an average common person. Issues like the concentrated
[Unknown]: benefit and disperse costs, the free rider problem, unintended consequences, a public myopia
[Unknown]: where only the short term cost of a policy is visible and the long term benefits are not,
[Unknown]: spontaneous order of things, a majority preference for a grand central plan rather than the invisible
[Unknown]: hand of voluntary exchange and cooperation. So given these and similar challenges in communicating
[Unknown]: the unseen, in your experience, what do you think are the best ways in which we can overcome this
[Amit Varma]: challenge? Thank you. Yeah, very, very powerful question. And I'm kind of embarrassed at the
[Amit Varma]: comparison with Dan Carlin because no one can be like Dan Carlin. I really got turned on to
[Amit Varma]: podcast as a medium when I heard hardcore history by Dan Carlin, which is just next level. You know,
[Guest]: it's amazing. I fell asleep. You told me to listen to it. And I think about halfway through the first
[Guest]: couple of episodes, I just like fell asleep. He had a lovely voice. But also it might be a lack
[Unknown]: of interest in that kind of a deep dive. So it wasn't for me. I think also spare attention and
[Amit Varma]: capacity because you might have been listening to him at normal speed and he is rather slow.
[Amit Varma]: So I listened to him at 2.5 at least. And I got turned on for those of my listeners who want to
[Amit Varma]: know to this incredible episode called blueprint for Armageddon, which was on World War One. And
[Amit Varma]: I think it's like 25 hours of content spread over five episodes of five hours each or something like
[Amit Varma]: that. And it's just him talking. It's nothing else. There's no sound effects, there's no music,
[Amit Varma]: it's just him talking. It's so pure and beautiful and incredible and thought provoking. And
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of just brilliant. And I've always since then wanted to do a solo history
[Amit Varma]: podcast at some point, but that you know, requires resources far beyond anything I might have right
[Amit Varma]: now. So maybe someday in the future. But to answer Kumar's perceptive question, and it's something
[Amit Varma]: that I have, you know, we all three of us have lamented this, that our brains are wired in
[Amit Varma]: prehistoric times, where we lived in different realities. And therefore, many of the truths
[Amit Varma]: about the world, the way it really works are unintuitive. Because, you know, in prehistoric
[Amit Varma]: times, we used to live in, you know, where things were scarce, and there was brutal competition,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, as Hobbes would put it harsh and brutish competition. And therefore, our brain
[Amit Varma]: evolved to think of the world in zero sum ways, that the only way somebody can benefit is if you
[Amit Varma]: take it away from somebody else. And we don't intuitively understand the positive some nature
[Amit Varma]: of voluntary interaction is what John Strassel calls a double thank you moment, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I buy a cup of coffee at a cafe, when the coffee is handed to me, I say thank you. And
[Amit Varma]: the person at the other person says thank you. And the thing is, I value the coffee more than
[Amit Varma]: the money and they value the money more than the coffee. And it's a mutually beneficial interaction,
[Amit Varma]: which is why you know, both of us saying thank you, double thank you moment, it's it's,
[Amit Varma]: it's a positive some game. But our brains think of the world in zero sum ways that if the rich
[Amit Varma]: are getting richer, the poorer must be getting poorer. And that's a difficult truth to communicate
[Amit Varma]: communicating something like spontaneous order is very hard to communicate that you don't need a
[Amit Varma]: grand central planner, that really complex systems like evolution, like markets like the like
[Amit Varma]: languages cannot happen by central committee, you know, that they, you know, that they happen in
[Amit Varma]: different ways. And there's a great episode called the evolution of everything that I read with Matt
[Amit Varma]: Ridley, where we spoke about this at some length. So this is a challenge. And I've I've thought
[Amit Varma]: about this. And I've recently sort of come to realize that the reason for this also lies in
[Amit Varma]: the distinction between the abstract and the concrete, that the reason these things have
[Amit Varma]: evolved is that if you're living in a time where you are in a little tribe, and you have to,
[Amit Varma]: everything is scarce, then your concrete reality has scarcity in it. And you will see the world
[Amit Varma]: in zero sum ways, because that is what you're doing for you to, you know, get the meaty part
[Amit Varma]: of that deer, you have to sort of, you know, win it over somebody else, that means someone else
[Amit Varma]: doesn't get it, and so on and so forth, that tribes of 100 people are best handled from the
[Amit Varma]: top down, perhaps, and spontaneous order is not necessary, because that level of complexity is
[Amit Varma]: not there. So I think perhaps the way to getting closer to communicating some of these things
[Amit Varma]: is by getting concrete, what is the problem, for example, with concentrated benefits and
[Amit Varma]: with concentrated benefits and diffuse costs. Now, I'll quickly go over the concept. And
[Amit Varma]: obviously, Shruti, you've thought about it and taught it a million times. But the concept
[Amit Varma]: basically is that, let's say in the case of Air India, that every year, Air India basically,
[Amit Varma]: a failing dying airline is kept alive by infusions of taxpayers money. And let's say each citizen is
[Amit Varma]: paying two rupees for it, I'm just picking a hypothetical number. Now, the point is that
[Amit Varma]: the benefit is concentrated, Air India gets it, and therefore they will lobby for it. And they
[Amit Varma]: will do all kinds of things. And if the beneficiary was a private party, they would contribute to
[Amit Varma]: party coffers, they would buy politicians, all of that, the benefits are concentrated. But the
[Amit Varma]: costs are diffused, that all of us are losing only two rupees, it is unseen, we don't even know that
[Amit Varma]: we are losing it. And therefore, why should we protest? And this becomes a dilemma. And the
[Amit Varma]: problem that therefore arises from this is that how can we therefore make it, you know, make this
[Amit Varma]: concrete aspect of the situation more explicit, so that the abstract principle then becomes obvious,
[Amit Varma]: and then that kind of comes across like, I remember once in a conversation with Kumar,
[Amit Varma]: when we were chatting about this, I spoke about it as flicking a light switch, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: once you flick the switch, and you turn it on, it's fine, the light is there, but you have to
[Amit Varma]: flick it. And, you know, even for me, I suffered from all these misconceptions, because that's how
[Amit Varma]: we are wired. And then you gradually flick the switches, and you see the world in a different
[Amit Varma]: way, because there is that. So as communicators of these ideas, which we care so deeply about,
[Amit Varma]: we have to find ways to flick these switches. And we cannot do that at the level of the idea
[Amit Varma]: at an abstract level, we can't do that at the level of abstraction, we have to get concrete,
[Amit Varma]: and we have to relate it to their own lives. And that becomes a complicated challenge.
[Amit Varma]: Like if the garbage outside your house has not been collected, you know, there are so many like
[Amit Varma]: you and I had done an episode on urban governance, where we spoke about the disconnect between power
[Amit Varma]: and accountability. And, you know, why that affects the governance in our cities. And all of
[Amit Varma]: that is abstract. How do you make it real by talking about why the person's garbage outside
[Amit Varma]: his house is not being collected? Or why, you know, whatever, whatever problems that
[Amit Varma]: citizens face in their everyday lives. And I think as communicators, that is a challenge that we have
[Amit Varma]: to sort of communicate at that level and not an abstract level. Because if we just talk about
[Amit Varma]: stuff at an abstract level, we will fail utterly. And I think this is something that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the extreme right wing does this very well. They are wrong, but they are wrong in that they talk
[Amit Varma]: about concrete things. So they build simple narratives. Like one of the reasons I wrote a
[Amit Varma]: column on this once about why Trump succeeded in 2016. And it wasn't because he was right,
[Amit Varma]: because he was basically wrong about everything, then, as he is now, which is not to say his
[Amit Varma]: opponents aren't also wrong, but he was wrong. But the stories he sold were simple stories,
[Amit Varma]: which are easy to understand. So when you're speaking to people in the Midwest, who don't
[Amit Varma]: have jobs anymore, it is easy to sell the narrative that immigrants are taking your jobs,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, immigration is bad, and that your jobs are being shipped overseas to China. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, China is bad. Now, both those narratives are wrong, but they are simple.
[Amit Varma]: So similarly, if you want to sort of communicate any kind of ideas at a mass level, you have to
[Amit Varma]: find a way to make it simple and relatable. And you do that at the level of the concrete.
[Guest]: No, and also, you know, you don't have to do it just once, right. So there's this great quote
[Guest]: by Frank Knight, who is also one of my intellectual heroes. And he said, it takes varied
[Guest]: reiterations to force alien concepts upon reluctant minds. Right. So it's not just about
[Guest]: putting it out there, or even as you said, though, it's very important of making it less abstract.
[Guest]: I think it's also story after story, example after example. So the way you gave the example
[Guest]: of Air India, I think if you gave 100 such examples, then you know, the broader public
[Guest]: choice principle of concentrated benefits and diffused costs might penetrate. And this is also
[Guest]: where I really enjoyed your conversation with Nilesh Mishra, you know, I mean, it was
[Guest]: the importance of storytelling, the value of sentiment, the value of nostalgia, you know,
[Guest]: of course, there are broader themes, they invoke certain emotions, which make you connect or make
[Guest]: things more intimate. And it's related to the art of conversation. But it's also related to the art
[Guest]: of education, right? Everything is not passion and information. It is also sentiment, it is also
[Guest]: nostalgia, it is also storytelling and fitting things within a broader tradition. I didn't ask
[Guest]: him for a question, though, I would have loved to because by the time we planned this episode,
[Guest]: that one wasn't out. So to the listeners who are disappointed, I apologize. I want to take a break
[Guest]: at this point, because in good, you know, seen and unseen tradition, we have breached many,
[Guest]: many barriers, we are now almost at like the two and a half hour mark, I think. So I want to take
[Guest]: a little commercial break, we're going to talk a little bit more, mainly about some of the policy
[Guest]: ideas that you have. And I know your love for books. So you know, I'd love to talk to you more
[Guest]: about books. So more for the listeners when we come back from this commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: How would you like to start your own podcast? Since you're listening to the seen and the unseen,
[Amit Varma]: I don't need to sell you on the power of podcasting. Audio is a unique medium different
[Amit Varma]: from any other. And it allows for a level of depth and engagement that no other form does.
[Amit Varma]: You've no doubt experienced this in the long form conversations that I've had here.
[Amit Varma]: But even for storytellers, this is the most exciting medium. And the best part of it all is
[Amit Varma]: anyone can start a podcast, you are limited only by your imagination and desire. And I want to
[Amit Varma]: help you by sharing my insights with you. I've just launched an online course called the art
[Amit Varma]: of podcasting, in which I will talk about what makes audio so unique, the different forms of
[Amit Varma]: storytelling that it enables the art of the interview, and what will make your podcast
[Amit Varma]: stand out. I'll talk about these broader concepts, as well as the nitty gritties of what equipment to
[Amit Varma]: use how to record how to distribute how to market your podcast and build your brand.
[Amit Varma]: My course consists of three webinars over three Sundays and cost rupees 10,000 plus GST,
[Amit Varma]: or about $150. For more details and to sign up, head on over to seen unseen.in slash learn the
[Amit Varma]: art of podcasting at seen unseen.in slash learn. Welcome back to the show. We needed this commercial
[Guest]: break very badly, because we're recording at a time when I need to eat to make sure I don't get
[Guest]: hangry. And um, it just you know, can just go on like this forever with no coffee, no food, no
[Guest]: water, nothing. He seems to be like this ace podcaster. But we took the break for me. So
[Guest]: welcome back. And Amit, now there are a bunch of questions. Now, you know, most of the show,
[Guest]: as you named it is the scene and the unseen, it was inspired by Bastiat. And a lot of the early
[Guest]: episodes were on policy topics, like very specifically, right. So you were like, for
[Guest]: instance, with Alex, you spoke about FSI, or with, you know, Kumar, you spoke about agricultural
[Guest]: reforms, and, you know, minimum and maximum land holdings when you and I've talked about property.
[Guest]: So we have a few of your guests and some of our common friends who have policy questions for you.
[Guest]: So I am just, you know, I have very little to add to their questions. They're all great thinkers.
[Guest]: So I'm just going to queue up their question. And then, you know, you can give us your policy
[Guest]: response. And I'll start with one of our common friends, Barun Mitra. You know, again, someone
[Guest]: that you and I usually agree with on on most aspects. This question has something to do with
[Guest]: our agreements and disagreements. So I will, you know, play this for you and then get your take on
[Unknown]: it. Amit likes to use the guideposts of consent and coercion to assess public policy matters.
[Unknown]: While I prefer the means and the ends framework. Most of the time, despite the slightly different
[Unknown]: guideposts, have still led us to very similar conclusions on a range of public policy issues.
[Unknown]: But with the onset of coronavirus, for the first time, Amit and I disagreed on the appropriate
[Unknown]: policy response to a public health emergency, particularly the relevance of lockdown in an
[Unknown]: epidemic situation. Amit held that a lockdown was justified, while I didn't see any justification
[Unknown]: in penalizing every citizen in search for the virus. So the question that has been making me
[Unknown]: think for the past few months is, why our framework didn't lead us to a common policy position,
[Unknown]: as had been the case for all the years? Yeah, well, what a fantastic question. And
[Amit Varma]: Barunda, of course, is again, one of my favorite people on the world, such a
[Amit Varma]: delightful gentleman, I've learned so much from over the years. I think our frameworks are pretty
[Amit Varma]: common in the sense that I also care about means and the ends in the sense that I care about
[Amit Varma]: means to not include coercion. And I value consent a lot. And I agree with Barun and indeed,
[Amit Varma]: the Mahatma Gandhi that, you know, the no end is ever justified by unjust means. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: we should be careful. Now, in this particular case, I also think that look, and I could be
[Amit Varma]: wrong here. This is one of those areas where one is never sure and I'm open to accepting I could
[Amit Varma]: be wrong. And I think, and I hope Barun will also share that sentiment. But I think that
[Amit Varma]: and I hope Barun will also share that sentiment, not am I being wrong, but either of us could be
[Amit Varma]: wrong. But that, you know, I think the purpose of the state is to protect the rights of citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And that includes, say, protesting the rights of citizens against external invaders, for example,
[Amit Varma]: which is why libertarians will say that you have to have rule of law so that rights are protected
[Amit Varma]: within a country. And you have to have, you know, an army or some kind of defense, which of course
[Amit Varma]: should be voluntary, which protects you from external invaders. How do we classify a virus?
[Amit Varma]: I think that, you know, the point is that when it comes to public health, I think, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not wearing a mask in public can create externalities for others. For example, this is why
[Amit Varma]: in general anti-vaxxers have it so wrong. Vaccines are important. You don't take a vaccine just for
[Amit Varma]: yourself, you take it to protect others as well. And if enough people refuse to get vaccinated,
[Amit Varma]: you are putting everybody else at risk. And we all agree that there is this liberal paradox,
[Amit Varma]: right, that to protect everyone's rights, that is to protect everyone's consent for that matter,
[Amit Varma]: you have to infringe on them a little bit. The very existence of the state is an infringement
[Amit Varma]: on individual freedom because, you know, a state can only exist based on taxes. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: there is some amount of coercion. And we all agree that the state is a necessary evil,
[Amit Varma]: the night watchman state, as the old classical liberals put it, is a necessary evil. Now,
[Amit Varma]: I think all ideological discussion comes down to how much coercion is justified by the state.
[Amit Varma]: That's all it comes down to. I think anyone who denies that every act of government is an act of
[Amit Varma]: violence, I wrote a column with that headline once, or that the state depends on coercion,
[Amit Varma]: is deluded. It is obvious that the existence of the state depends on coercion. And the only
[Amit Varma]: line of argument is about how much coercion is necessary, and what justifies coercion. So,
[Amit Varma]: does like everything that the government does, whether in terms of spending money or whatever
[Amit Varma]: it does, has a cost. And that cost is coercive. So, that's the question. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: the argument would be about, you know, you can argue, does a statute justify that coercion?
[Amit Varma]: Does, you know, keeping a failing airline alive with all the other associated costs that you have
[Amit Varma]: that you have of crowding out and all of that, does that justify the coercion? Do roads and bridges
[Amit Varma]: justify the coercion because of the positive externalities they have? And I think in this
[Amit Varma]: case, there are reasonable arguments to be made at both ends. So, similarly, does a lockdown justify
[Amit Varma]: the coercion? And it's a very difficult question. You know, you and I did an episode in April where
[Amit Varma]: we spoke about the policy trade-offs involved here. And the point is that no matter what you
[Amit Varma]: do, it will seem like the wrong decision because the cost, which is the lives that were lost and
[Amit Varma]: what happened to the economy, the cost will be visible and the benefits, which is the lives that
[Amit Varma]: were saved because of the measures you took, will be invisible. And this is regardless of whether
[Amit Varma]: there is a lockdown or no lockdown or whatever. Now, this question becomes extremely complicated
[Amit Varma]: because even if you say that a lockdown is necessary, you then look at the state capacity.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you argue that our lockdown was necessary at the time the Prime Minister called it,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you look at state capacity and you think that, okay, there's still going to be
[Amit Varma]: enormous suffering because state capacity can't handle what is required. And added to that,
[Amit Varma]: you have, say, political apathy, as in the case of the migrant workers, which was a humanitarian
[Amit Varma]: tragedy that played out at scale. And you have all these other things going wrong. And I just
[Amit Varma]: think that this is a really difficult kind of question. And we argued about this, we discussed
[Amit Varma]: it rather, I don't think you and I really argued about it. I think both of us agreed that to some
[Amit Varma]: extent, you had to have a lockdown at that point or, you know, public health could have fallen
[Amit Varma]: apart. At the same time, I get Barun's point that, you know, it's coming in the way of the
[Amit Varma]: voluntary interactions, which make us prosperous as a society in the first place. And if Amit
[Amit Varma]: wants to trade with Barun, who is the government to say that he cannot leave his house and do that
[Amit Varma]: and meanwhile, both of them starve at home. And that is, of course, a problem. And in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not even disagreeing with him. I agree with his concerns. And I think he would agree with
[Amit Varma]: mine as well. And where the policy decision should fall, I don't know. I still think that
[Amit Varma]: a lockdown was necessary. I think it was completely botched. But I think it was necessary. Otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: our hospitals could have been overwhelmed. And we could just have had a disaster that spiraled out
[Amit Varma]: of nowhere. Now the point is, the lockdown was badly botched in terms of what happened to migrant
[Amit Varma]: workers and the implementation and the fact that I'm not sure that the government managed to use
[Amit Varma]: that time wisely to get in the state of readiness that they should have managed. But all those
[Amit Varma]: questions apart, I think it's very complicated and nuanced. And I'm completely open to realizing
[Amit Varma]: three years later that I was completely wrong. Had there been no lockdown, it would have been
[Amit Varma]: better for all of us. But at the time you make the sort of, you know, it's complicated and messy.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't think I would say that the state should not have the right to call something like
[Amit Varma]: a lockdown. Because if like, for example, okay, the you know, the Coronavirus is what it is,
[Amit Varma]: but imagine a far deadlier virus, you know, imagine a virus that is both extremely contagious
[Amit Varma]: and kill 60% of the people who get it. Is a lockdown justified then? Where do you draw?
[Unknown]: Ebola?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Ebola was different because it wasn't so contagious. It was much more fatal. You know,
[Amit Varma]: this Coronavirus was hyped up as being in that sweet spot where it is both very contagious and
[Amit Varma]: sufficiently fatal to be problematic in that sense, almost a game theory optimal virus. But
[Amit Varma]: Ebola wasn't there. But imagine a virus that is as deadly as Ebola and as contagious
[Amit Varma]: as any Coronavirus. What do you do then? Is a lockdown justified? If it is not, what are you,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I don't know how you can justify a lockdown not being necessary in those circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: And if you think it is justified then but not justified now, where do you draw the line? Based
[Amit Varma]: on what information do you draw the line, especially when we are in the kind of epistemic
[Amit Varma]: fog, if I may use jargon again. So I think that's it. It's a deep and nuanced question. But I think
[Amit Varma]: Varun and I have the same kind of framework. And you could say that I am in fact being hypocritical
[Amit Varma]: here because I am sort of, you know, turning away from the question of consent that the government
[Amit Varma]: did not take the consent of all the people that it forcibly locked down. But I think we also accept
[Amit Varma]: that there is a state that has a certain minimum sort of role to play. And the real argument then
[Amit Varma]: is that does something like this fall within that role?
[Guest]: You know, I'd add a couple more things to this. So one, of course, I mean, I like you,
[Guest]: I'm completely open to realizing I'm wrong about this a few years from now.
[Guest]: I already have a more nuanced view than maybe in, you know, early April when we talked about this,
[Guest]: which is, of course, you know, some kind of intervention I thought is necessary. But is
[Guest]: it necessary in rural Bihar? Is it necessary in Arunachal Pradesh, for instance, where there are
[Guest]: no cases, at least at the time of the lockdown, there were no cases, right? It's important to,
[Guest]: you know, maybe come down really hard on the Mumbai locals where you can think of them as
[Guest]: super spreaders, right? Is it really that important to come down on rural areas or farm activity?
[Guest]: So, you know, that is one kind of, you know, aspect of the lockdown for which I completely
[Guest]: understand why someone like Barun and even us would just be, you know, think not twice,
[Guest]: but many, many times over this kind of an imposition of government over liberty.
[Guest]: But there is another aspect to it. Now, normally, the public choice economist in me takes over,
[Guest]: and we talk about government failure and, you know, the incentives and how government does
[Guest]: things badly. Does that mean government should not do it at all? Right? And this is a question
[Guest]: for which I honestly don't have a good answer. Now, I think policing is an incredibly important
[Guest]: function of government. I think India is under-policed. I think the people who pay the
[Guest]: most because it's under-policed is minorities and, you know, Dalits and women and things like that.
[Guest]: Now, because we haven't figured out policing and how to do it right, does that mean the state
[Guest]: shouldn't be in the business of policing? Right? Some libertarian friends we have would say yes,
[Guest]: right? Some would say absolutely not. There are very, very minimal areas like, you know,
[Guest]: this is probably someone like Ajay Shah, right? Or someone like Niranjan Rajyadhyak, right?
[Guest]: These are critical state functions, night watchman state functions, and it's very important to
[Guest]: to slowly give the chance and allow the state to build capacity in these areas. Now, I know the
[Guest]: lockdown is not the same thing as, you know, policing, nor do I want the government to get
[Guest]: very good at imposing lockdowns, because then we are in Kashmir and China, and that's a horror
[Guest]: scenario in itself. But to me, the fact that the government doesn't do the lockdown well,
[Guest]: is normally a good argument. In this instance, I think it weakens just a little bit,
[Guest]: because usually when we say the government is not good at providing, you know, telephones,
[Guest]: you know, let the market solve it, the market actually solves it pretty well, okay? In this
[Guest]: particular instance, I'm not sure how voluntary interactions, because we're not talking about a
[Guest]: market for viruses, but how voluntary interactions or that they necessarily solve it well, right?
[Guest]: We know people who've continued having big events, super spreader events, there are people
[Guest]: who continue having weddings, right, political rallies, Chief Minister Adityanath was planning
[Guest]: this huge event, just before the lockdown was called for Ram Navami, and they would have
[Guest]: probably gone ahead with that, you know, had some kind of a mandate not come in. So it's not that
[Guest]: private citizens are in a place to act in the same way as they do when they are buying telephones
[Guest]: and bread and butter, either relative to, you know, let's say the government running Modern
[Guest]: Bakery, or the government running Lodhi Hotel or Air India. So there is also that comparison,
[Guest]: did the government botch the lockdown? Absolutely. Was it necessary? To me, some
[Guest]: intervention was necessary, this kind of a horrific lockdown, especially I thought it
[Guest]: would go on for three weeks, it went on for like, whatever 70-80 days, right? So there is that
[Guest]: element of that trade off. And there is also, do we need a lockdown? The question is compared to
[Guest]: what and I honestly do not see private citizens acting that responsibly, right, as one would
[Guest]: require in this kind of a pandemic. Because for everyone, it's important to get married, it's
[Guest]: important to have a family event, it is important to have a political rally, right, and the and the
[Guest]: losses are passed on to someone else or the externalities passed on to someone else. So I
[Guest]: think, even within, you know, the libertarian classical liberal framework of thinking,
[Guest]: there's obviously a lot of things to consider. But this is how I have started to think about
[Guest]: issues of the lockdown. Now, I know, it doesn't get me to the exact same point as
[Guest]: Barun. And I keep wondering why, because like you, I, I hugely admire him. And maybe, you know,
[Guest]: over a period of time, we all kind of figure out where we are on this. But, you know, epistemic
[Guest]: fog is real. I thought the dead bodies would just be piling up in India, based on my experience with
[Guest]: the healthcare system in Italy, when I lived there. And, you know, then when they had like,
[Guest]: you know, this kind of crazy fatality rate in Italy, I was like, if this is happening in Italy,
[Guest]: what will happen in India. But at that time, when I was imagining those horrifying things,
[Guest]: we didn't know that it disproportionately affects older people, or that younger people are not,
[Guest]: you know, affected quite the same, and the fatality rates are much lower. You know,
[Guest]: we just didn't have this, this information in March, early April, or at least, you know, the
[Guest]: really good studies from the cruise ship and things like that hadn't come out yet. So I think
[Guest]: the epistemic fog lifting also genuinely helps our understanding of, hey, only 7% or 6.5% of
[Guest]: Indians are above 65 years of age. So you know, maybe this wasn't that necessary. Also, Indians
[Guest]: don't overwhelmingly, you know, put the elderly in old age homes or nursing homes, which means you
[Guest]: don't have this kind of huge impact where one event and you know, you suddenly have lots and
[Guest]: lots of people dead in a particular area or a particular county. So, you know, those things
[Guest]: have helped us understand why India wasn't as badly affected. But at the time, I still believe
[Guest]: some intervention was necessary. Should it have been all India? Should it have been as a grave as
[Guest]: it was? Should it have, you know, been extended three times over those things, I would agree with
[Amit Varma]: Varun were quite unnecessary. I mean, I'll say a couple of things. I mean, one is a fairly trivial
[Amit Varma]: point almost that people I have noticed worryingly, often come up with responses to policy based on
[Amit Varma]: where it is coming from, who is a politician in charge, for example, it's almost interesting to
[Amit Varma]: see here that we had the right wing government of Modi calling a lockdown in India and a right
[Amit Varma]: wing government of Trump opposing a lockdown in the US. So I don't like to use words like right
[Amit Varma]: wing and left wing because I don't think those frameworks are correct. But regardless, and
[Amit Varma]: similarly, the opposition breaks out along those lines that those who oppose Modi here will say,
[Amit Varma]: array, the lockdown was too strict. And those who oppose Trump there will say that we need a
[Amit Varma]: stricter lockdown and more of a lockdown and all of that. But I'm not saying that's why Varun
[Amit Varma]: opposed it at all. I mean, he of course opposes Modi, but this is perfectly law opposing the
[Amit Varma]: lockdown is very cogent according to his framework. So I respect that. But the deeper point I want to
[Amit Varma]: make is a point that I think every libertarian will agree with. And again, I don't really like
[Amit Varma]: to use these sort of tribal classifications. But I think anyone who uses these to describe themselves
[Amit Varma]: will agree with anyway, which is that what went wrong in India, the botched lockdown also speaks
[Amit Varma]: to a fundamental structural problem. And I'm not even referring to the flailing state. And I wrote
[Amit Varma]: a column about how India's great disasters as shown is, you know, even worse than the
[Amit Varma]: viruses are flailing state, which, you know, causes far more suffering than the virus can or
[Amit Varma]: has. But rather, that our structure of governance is true top down. And if it was far more local,
[Amit Varma]: the responses would have been better. Like as you just said, that the policy that you carry out in
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai is not something that really fits in Arunachal Pradesh or rural Bihar or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So if governance is really local, and responsive to what the actual needs on the ground of local
[Amit Varma]: citizens are, then better decisions can be taken that way at a local level. Now, there will be
[Amit Varma]: places where people get it wrong. But there will also be places where people get it right. And the
[Amit Varma]: point is, a bad decision will not scale in the way that it can, when there is just one guy in Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: who is making a bad decision, and then it just percolates down. So I would have preferred that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, those sort of... I've just written a paper on this with
[Guest]: G.P. Manish and Abhishek Chaturgupta. So I will send this paper to you talking about
[Guest]: the reason we had such a terrible lockdown imposing these horrible, you know, unintended
[Guest]: consequences and costs on the poor is because India's federalism is too centripetal, which has
[Guest]: made our governance structure very top heavy and very dysfunctional. So I'll send this paper to
[Guest]: you. I'm already intimidated, centripetal. Let's move. I'm sorry, there is no easier word to
[Guest]: describe that. You can admonish me again, or scold if you shall. But it's hard to come up
[Guest]: with another word for centripetal, right? Because we're supposed to be federal, we're not centralized,
[Guest]: right? But we have a bias towards the center, we gravitate towards the center. So if you have a
[Guest]: better word for that, you should tell me. We can change the title of our paper, we still have time.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the next question. I don't want to change the title of your paper.
[Guest]: Yes. So the next question, I mean, these are just, you know, it just so happens that some very
[Guest]: brilliant women have asked a lot of policy questions. And, you know, all great economic
[Guest]: thinkers. So I'm going to start with one of our favorite, you know, books in the last few years,
[Guest]: which is Pooja Mehra, and her book, The Lost Decade. She's, I think, one of the best, you know,
[Guest]: economics covering journalists that we have in India. And that book was really an eye opener for
[Guest]: me, again, because as a public choice person, we always, you know, think less about a particular
[Guest]: individual or their role and think always in terms of incentives and institutions and structures.
[Guest]: But her book simultaneously, I mean, while illuminating that her book also illuminates
[Guest]: the importance of good leadership, the importance of accidents, the importance of personalities and
[Guest]: histories of people getting together and not getting along and things like that. So it was,
[Guest]: again, one of my favorite episodes that you have done. And I don't know, was this before 100?
[Guest]: Or after 100? Well, after 100.
[Guest]: Okay, well, after 100. So definitely, we haven't discussed this before. And so I'm going to play
[Guest]: Pooja Mehra's question for you.
[Unknown]: Hi, Shruti and Amit. Many congratulations on the 200th episode milestone. Wish you
[Unknown]: hundreds more. So the question for me for Amit is this. What I'd like to know, Amit,
[Unknown]: is if you feel optimistic, cautiously optimistic, or, like me, pessimistic about the future.
[Unknown]: I feel India's made a hash of the window of opportunity it had when a lot of good
[Unknown]: things came together for it. First, a prime minister who's a good economist and understands
[Unknown]: rather well how the system functions and how the system resists change. Then a prime minister who
[Unknown]: enjoys tremendous popular support, favorable demographics with a large young population
[Unknown]: and a global openness for trade, etc. A corporate sector that is chasing excellence for a change.
[Unknown]: This window and its many positives are now closing. Many negatives, among them increasing
[Unknown]: cussedness in politics, policy, and in general, dominate the scene now.
[Unknown]: So, what is the economic and socio-economic future for India look like to you?
[Unknown]: Should we still hold on to our dreams of a vastly improved future,
[Unknown]: or should we brace for a prolonged period of difficulties of all sorts?
[Unknown]: Thank you. Her question almost made me sad. That was a lovely episode, by the way. And her book is
[Amit Varma]: really an eye-opener into what goes on behind the scenes in government and politics and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And a very nuanced book, which shows you that it's wrong to blame one party or the other,
[Amit Varma]: one per person or the other, that everyone's responding to incentives. And this is how kind
[Amit Varma]: of things work out. And Pooja is, of course, a very nuanced thinker. And you did mention that
[Amit Varma]: she has this podcast, which we'll link from the show notes. Of course. Yeah, you've cracked open
[Unknown]: the space right now. All your guests have had spin-off series of their own. I'm not going to
[Amit Varma]: take any credit for it at all. And Pooja's podcast. I think you should. I think you should. There is,
[Guest]: you've cultivated an audience for it. So that's pretty, pretty special. But I'll let you answer
[Guest]: Pooja's question first. Yeah. So yeah, this is almost like the hope and despair question.
[Amit Varma]: I asked so many of my guests. And I think I've answered it somewhere or the other, but it's,
[Amit Varma]: it's, yeah, it's tough. I mean, you know, one, I think that it's going to get worse before it gets
[Amit Varma]: better, if it gets better. So it's going to get worse before it gets better is actually a hopeful
[Amit Varma]: statement, not a despairing one. That, you know, our discourse is very polluted. And what has
[Amit Varma]: happened is that we are inevitably getting more and more polluted. And I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we're getting more and more polarised, because the worst angels of our nature, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: the worst demons of our nature are given scale by social media and technology. And that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that makes me feel fairly sad sometimes about the way things are going. And I don't know what
[Amit Varma]: one can really do. You know, politics has become, politics has always been not about governance,
[Amit Varma]: but about narrative. And all narratives that are out there are in some way reductive and toxic to
[Amit Varma]: different levels. So what do you kind of do about that? And that's what I've always said has given
[Amit Varma]: me hope is that I've and I think, you know, while I despair of what is happening in the larger,
[Amit Varma]: broader scheme where abstract ideas rule, what I do take hope from is the small concrete ways in
[Amit Varma]: which our lives are improved, especially by technology. Like I think where politics has
[Amit Varma]: failed liberalism, technology has succeeded by empowering individuals in many different ways by
[Amit Varma]: empowering them with choice by empowering them with access to information, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, maybe there is hope there. I mean, anyone who is listening to this is listening to
[Amit Varma]: this because of technology that didn't exist 10 years ago. And you could have podcast 10 years
[Amit Varma]: ago, but the precise confluence of technologies that has brought my voice to your ears right now,
[Amit Varma]: didn't really exist or not, not at the circumstances. And so, and I think the future
[Amit Varma]: is largely a sea of unknown unknowns. So, you know, we can't tell in what ways good things
[Amit Varma]: will happen or even bad things will happen. And there will be domains in which things will get
[Amit Varma]: worse. And the arc of history will bend towards injustice as it were, or it will seem like that
[Amit Varma]: in the short term. But, you know, I have hoped that in the long run, it will sort of, and maybe
[Amit Varma]: I'm being delusional. So here is again, this is something somewhere where I could realize that
[Amit Varma]: I should have been more pessimistic in the future. Who knows? You know, for me, I try,
[Amit Varma]: these days, I try not to think about what's happening in the broader political space or in
[Amit Varma]: the economic space, because it is, it makes me angry and frustrated, and there's nothing I can
[Amit Varma]: do about it. So I want to keep exploring ideas and keep, you know, keep keep the discourse going
[Amit Varma]: about all of these things, but there's nothing I can do about it. So at a personal level,
[Amit Varma]: my personal philosophy really comes down to cherishing small joys, like the good conversations
[Amit Varma]: I get to have, or just, you know, the kachoris I had earlier today. And which makes it sound
[Amit Varma]: very trivial. But you know, I wish I had kachoris today. Yeah, there you go. I have just darkened
[Amit Varma]: your world. I have. Yeah. So yeah, so I think, you know, so you do what you can at an individual
[Amit Varma]: level, both for yourself, for your, you know, own mental enrichment, and, and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: and whatever you can throw at the wall of ideas out there, you throw it, you know, the point is,
[Amit Varma]: you don't, you don't, I mean, I think of Bastia again, you know, no chance of success, but he
[Amit Varma]: writes all those great books, like the law and all his essays like that, which is seen and that
[Amit Varma]: which is not seen. So you just got to do what you got to do. The future is unknown unknowns,
[Amit Varma]: you increase the probability of good outcomes, if you can continue doing good things now,
[Amit Varma]: without hoping for, you know, good outcomes later. So, you know, you just increase that
[Amit Varma]: probability, you add your voice to the mix, you kind of do what you can, but you also I think,
[Amit Varma]: I think all of us also need to sort of look us look after ourselves as well.
[Guest]: No. And, you know, on this aspect, I feel like also there are things we are optimistic about.
[Guest]: And the one thing I'm optimistic about, the older I get, is I think most people are fundamentally
[Guest]: good, decent people. Right. And in that I have a very large amount of hope for the future of India,
[Guest]: right? I know everyone thinks everyone hates everyone. And there is all this right wing
[Guest]: anger and left wing anger and people think Twitter is what the real world looks like.
[Guest]: The real world in my sense, I mean, I know India is remarkably violent and remarkably difficult and
[Guest]: all of those things, you know, casteist, racist, misogynistic, but it's also full of remarkable
[Guest]: kindness, you know, in the face of extreme shortages and, you know, some really difficult
[Guest]: circumstances for a lot of people. And the more I travel in India, the more I see that kind of,
[Guest]: you know, individual level kindness, that gives me a lot of hope. The other thing that gives me a
[Guest]: lot of hope is I, you know, also do Emergent Ventures, right, which is one of the Mercatus
[Guest]: Center platforms with which we support moonshot ideas. And just reading the applications from
[Guest]: really young people, their ambition, you know, their imagination, their creativity. I,
[Guest]: anytime I work on Emergent Ventures applications on a given day, you know, the next few hours are
[Guest]: very bright and optimistic for that particular reason. So I'm also hugely optimistic of the
[Guest]: younger people in India. I want to now move on to the other favorite resident economist that we have,
[Guest]: and that is Rajeshwari Sengupta, right? I mean, she is just such a great thinker. Again, you know,
[Guest]: our fields of specialization are different. So anytime I read a column or a paper by Rajeshwari,
[Guest]: immediately it's got like, you know, my brain just expands and opens up a little bit more. So
[Guest]: I really value her as an academic, but also as, you know, a guest on your podcast as a fellow
[Guest]: guest, because we, we did one episode together. So I had the pleasure of meeting her. And she also
[Guest]: has one of these big think questions for you. So I'm not going to say more, I'm just I'm going to,
[Guest]: you know, play the question then. And then we'll talk about it.
[Unknown]: Hi, this is Rajeshwari. First of all, heartiest congratulations to Amit and team on completing
[Unknown]: 200 episodes of a podcast, which I think is one of the best in the country on the topics that it
[Unknown]: covers. I've thoroughly enjoyed listening to several episodes and learned a lot. I wish you
[Unknown]: guys all the best as you hopefully continue to enlighten us with more such informative shows.
[Unknown]: My question for Amit is as follows. The podcast can safely be categorized as one
[Unknown]: that caters to a highly educated English speaking elite audience. But the word elite
[Unknown]: now has a negative connotation, it seems, in several societies, including us. All over the
[Unknown]: world, we are witnessing a sort of a backlash against us elites. The unsaid unwritten criticism
[Unknown]: seems to be that we the elite, the intellectual thinkers of the country have ignored or
[Unknown]: marginalized for common man. And in doing so, somewhere we have lost the plot, we have lost
[Unknown]: the narrative. There seems to be a deep disconnect between what we say or think or write, and what
[Unknown]: the common man who votes in our democracy believes in. So my question for Amit today is that,
[Unknown]: is there anything that he thinks that we can or need to do to bridge this ever expanding divide?
[Unknown]: Or do we risk becoming redundant and reduced to passive observers reminiscing about the past
[Unknown]: when things were different? Yeah, what a what a fantastic question. No. Yeah, it's it's Rajesh.
[Unknown]: And it doesn't surprise you that it comes from Rajeshwari, right? Like she, she never thinks
[Unknown]: narrowly. She just thinks so big and broad. I just, you know, classic macroeconomist thinking
[Amit Varma]: macro question. Yeah, she's great. I did an episode on GDP with her, which was a fabulous
[Amit Varma]: episode. And for anyone who wants to understand the concept of the GDP, and the way it's measured
[Amit Varma]: and the larger conceptual questions as well. That's a great episode. And you Rajeshwari and
[Amit Varma]: Vivek Kaur were my guests in a four person episode, we did 12 dream reforms, which is
[Amit Varma]: one of my 10 most popular episodes, I think. And that was great fun. And you and Rajeshwari were,
[Amit Varma]: of course, fighting all the time. We're not fighting. Economists talk to each other. I
[Amit Varma]: think we scared everyone. Yeah, very deep question. So let me let me respond to it by
[Amit Varma]: saying that first of all, I mean, I of course, use the elites in a banal descriptive sense,
[Amit Varma]: but it's obviously true. We are the elites, right? We have to acknowledge our own good fortune and
[Amit Varma]: our own privilege and all of that. And it's true. We are the elites by definition, because
[Amit Varma]: there are so few of us and we are so fortunate. As far as the criticisms of elites are concerned,
[Amit Varma]: I think they are largely justified. I think they're largely justified because elites too often,
[Amit Varma]: people like us, and I include you and me, will sit in ivory towers and be sanctimonious about
[Amit Varma]: what is good for everybody, including what is good for the common person. And, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: because for so long, elites have controlled the levers of the state and the levers of media and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. We'll, you know, we can do what we want and we can sort of, our narratives are the
[Amit Varma]: ones that get through. And you could say in a sense that has started to change in recent times,
[Amit Varma]: and there are ebbs and flows in that. I think the two, you know, to get back to the constructive
[Amit Varma]: part of it that what can elites do better, I think there are sort of two important things that we can
[Amit Varma]: do better. One is at a level of attitude, we need to be open. We don't need to look down on people
[Amit Varma]: who, you know, are not elites and say that, oh, you know, so-and-so voted for Modi because he's
[Amit Varma]: bigoted or so-and-so voted for Trump, so he must be a racist. And I think that kind of condescending,
[Amit Varma]: demeaning attitude doesn't help. People's concerns are different from ours. We have to be
[Amit Varma]: open to understanding. See, people contain multitudes. Like you said earlier, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is much kindness in the common person towards others, even towards those who he would
[Amit Varma]: consider in an abstract sense to be the other, you know, that abstract term, but there is kindness
[Amit Varma]: in an actual concrete way towards that. And I had a, I had an episode recently with Anshul Malhotra
[Amit Varma]: where we discussed the concrete and the abstract a lot and very moving episode for me. And so I
[Amit Varma]: think that this, we need to do that. We need to stop looking down on people and say that these
[Amit Varma]: are the unwashed masses. What do they know? We know better and all of that. And we need to be open
[Amit Varma]: to A, their concerns and open to their concerns, not in a way that we are, you know, giving
[Amit Varma]: compassion from on top, but actually try to understand where are they coming from? Why are
[Amit Varma]: they, because the point is, you know, there, but for the grace of God, go, aye, as it were. And,
[Amit Varma]: and that's actually the wrong quote, because it's not even as if somebody is in an inferior
[Amit Varma]: position and someone is better or someone is inferior or someone is better. It's not like
[Amit Varma]: that at all. It's just that everyone is a creature of their circumstances and their thinking. And
[Amit Varma]: maybe it is some of the elites who are in fact, intellectually hobbled by a narrowness of vision.
[Amit Varma]: So I think elites need to be open and especially in one good way of doing this is through considering
[Amit Varma]: what Barun calls means. And I would call consent that if you want to, if you want your ideas to
[Amit Varma]: percolate through society, kindly do not impose them at the cost of others, but try to make it
[Amit Varma]: happen in a bottoms up way. Too many of the elites have a particular vision of the world, which they
[Amit Varma]: want to impose on others out of the best possible intentions. And I sort of have an issue with that.
[Amit Varma]: So that's one aspect where the elites can do better just in terms of their attitude and their
[Amit Varma]: approach. Have some humility, be open, don't, you know, try to look at the world in a top down way
[Amit Varma]: and impose your ideas in that manner. And secondly, I would say that if the elites really have a sense
[Amit Varma]: of conviction in what their ideas are, like you and I did and going back to Kumar's question,
[Amit Varma]: then focus on a narrative where you're not talking at someone, but you're actually talking to
[Amit Varma]: someone, you're respecting their concerns, and you're trying to convince them in a respectful
[Amit Varma]: way, instead of lecturing to them, and judging them because they don't agree with you. So they
[Amit Varma]: must be bad people, and so on and so forth, which is happening too much. And yeah, so these two
[Amit Varma]: things, I think a lot of criticisms of and anger at elites are justified, and we should have the
[Amit Varma]: humility to accept that and the capacity to then think about how do we communicate better. And I
[Amit Varma]: think a lot of the answer comes in learning from others who are not like us. And some of the answer
[Amit Varma]: comes from being able to have the sort of dialogue with them that we can convince them of our ideas.
[Guest]: I would add one more thing. And maybe this is because I have been in the academy my whole life
[Guest]: that I feel this particularly, I think elites, not just Indians everywhere in the world, but also
[Guest]: very cliquish. And, you know, it's like a club with a secret handshake, right? Because if you
[Guest]: didn't know how to pronounce that French word correctly, or you know, you know, you said Rodin
[Guest]: instead of Rodin, then you know, oh, you are you are not you don't know the secret handshake,
[Guest]: right? So there is, there is a very cliquish nature, we use pronunciation, we use schooling,
[Guest]: we use brands, you know, what you wear, things like that, right? Like how you speak as proxies
[Guest]: for whether you are part of the club or not part of the club. I find that particularly disturbing.
[Guest]: And I never realized this about Indian elites while I was living in India, I was probably one
[Guest]: of them who would have made fun of someone, you know, I hope I wouldn't have been that unkind.
[Guest]: But you know, I can easily imagine myself being one of those people, either openly making fun of
[Guest]: someone or at least like thinking in my head, I can't believe they don't know how to say that.
[Guest]: But I think one thing that has changed me is also being an immigrant, right? So once you leave
[Guest]: the place that you were raised in, and you come to a new world, which was open enough to accept
[Guest]: you, even though I'm not one of them, right? I'm not, I'm not American. And being welcomed with
[Guest]: open arms, people engaging with you, people mentoring you, teaching you so on so forth.
[Guest]: And now suddenly, the lens with which I look at my own community or childhood or my own people,
[Guest]: so to speak, people like us just flipped. So you know, ever since I left India, I have had
[Guest]: actually, I guess, a more harsh view of this club nature of elites, like I just despise,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, the people in a very pejorative way, say, you know, Khan Market,
[Guest]: Kabal or something like that. But I grew up in Khan Market, you know, Bari Bookstores
[Guest]: was my bookstore, right? Like, India International Center is where we had family dinner. So I have
[Guest]: also been in that sort of, you know, Kabal to know enough that it is very much an in group,
[Guest]: you know, you are one of us or out sort of environments. And I think that is something
[Guest]: Indian elites really need to change as an at an individual and at a group level. I think this,
[Guest]: there's also a value in networks, right? Thanks to Twitter, I have been speaking to more people
[Guest]: who are from different backgrounds, right? Dalits, LGBTQ members, who, who I normally wouldn't have
[Guest]: met, we would have never been in the same room, you know, given the circumstances in which I grew
[Guest]: up in India. And one of the things I realized is one of the hardest things for Dalit students to
[Guest]: get into American universities is letters of recommendation. Right? There aren't enough people
[Guest]: that they know, who would write a letter for them that would carry weight in an American university
[Guest]: that, you know, would get them admission. Of course, they know wonderful thinkers, I'm sure
[Guest]: they have great teachers. But there is this gap, and this gap exists, because we wouldn't let them
[Guest]: in. Right? So I have made this offer multiple times on Twitter and privately, and I'll make
[Guest]: it on your show, that, you know, students who need help and help opening doors, opening networks
[Guest]: within academy in India or abroad, they need people to recommend them or at least people to mentor
[Guest]: them. And we need to open up a little bit and not say, I'm only going to mentor so and so who came
[Guest]: from, you know, my father's friend's son, or, you know, someone who grew up in my neighborhood, or
[Guest]: is the, you know, alumni of my school and things like that. So I think this in group clique behavior
[Amit Varma]: really needs to end. Yeah. And some of these exclusionary behavior is, of course, the default
[Amit Varma]: condition of being an elite and not necessarily an intentional, this thing on the part of the
[Amit Varma]: elites, but it helps to be aware of it. And that self awareness is important. I'll just respond to
[Amit Varma]: a couple of the things that you said. One is about pronunciations. You know, I read someone make the
[Amit Varma]: point once which I agree wholeheartedly with, and it's a great point, is that when you hear someone
[Amit Varma]: pronounce something wrong, you should actually respect the person and applaud him. Because it
[Amit Varma]: means that he is not in those circles, where people talk about that person or that idea,
[Amit Varma]: but nevertheless, he has read up on it enough to know about it, but he can't pronounce it,
[Amit Varma]: which which shows that added sort of work that the person has put in. And therefore, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if someone says Rodin instead of Rodin, which I'm sure I must have done at the start, the very first
[Amit Varma]: time I read the word, how would I have thought of it exactly like that, right? So it's, it's
[Amit Varma]: perfectly fine. And and we need to sort of lose some of that inbuilt snobbishness. The second
[Amit Varma]: thing I'll say is that, you know, I think I've sort of been an outsider in every sort of community
[Amit Varma]: that I've been remotely part of in my life, whether it's an intellectual community or writers or poker
[Amit Varma]: players or whatever, I've kind of been on the fringes one foot in one foot out very different
[Amit Varma]: kind of view bringing a different lens and all of that. So I've kind of gotten this from the start
[Amit Varma]: that while I am extremely fortunate and privileged and all that, there's just so many problems with,
[Amit Varma]: you know, those sort of narrow, constricted worlds. And the other thing I would say is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we know for a fact that this podcast, for example, does have an elite audience,
[Amit Varma]: it goes out to a lot of the elites, and especially young PhD students, and so on and so forth. And
[Amit Varma]: if they are listening to that, I just ask that always retain intellectual humility. Because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we reflexively fall into certain ways of thinking that are common in our circles,
[Amit Varma]: you know, depending on where we are being educated or the circles that we talk to and
[Amit Varma]: whatever. And it's always sort of tempting to harden the ways in which you think to fit in
[Amit Varma]: with your peers and to gain brownie points for them or whatever. And that's a natural human
[Amit Varma]: tendency, but always try as far as possible to retain a certain amount of intellectual humility,
[Amit Varma]: and to not make the mistake of dehumanizing those who disagree with you. Like one thing that is
[Amit Varma]: so sad about these modern times is that discourse has become so toxic, that if someone disagrees
[Amit Varma]: with us, we treat them as if they are a bad person, there is a character flaw there.
[Amit Varma]: They are the enemy.
[Amit Varma]: They are the enemy and kindly avoid that. But enough of my hectoring as the elites would do.
[Guest]: And let's move on.
[Guest]: I think that is a posh word. Amit, you need to find a simpler word for that.
[Amit Varma]: Hoist by my own petard to use an elite cliche,
[Amit Varma]: again, something I won against, by the way, in my course. But yeah.
[Guest]: Now, I want to get to a couple of like more concrete policy.
[Guest]: So the next question, again, comes from, you know, one of our favorite people and thinkers.
[Guest]: This is Hamsini Hariharan. I mean, off late, I mean, not that I didn't admire her before,
[Guest]: but my admiration for her has increased many fold since she got into the world of China.
[Guest]: Right. And it feels like this different universe, whether it's the language,
[Guest]: whether it's actually going to China and spending time there, whether it's really trying to
[Guest]: understand the world from a completely different lens. Right. Seeing India through a different
[Guest]: culture, through the neighbor's point of view. So Hamsini, if you're listening to this,
[Guest]: you know, my admiration for you has only increased. And Hamsini has a question for you. So I will
[Guest]: play the question first and then we'll talk about it.
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit. Congratulations on 200 episodes of The Seen and The Unseen.
[Unknown]: Here's my question for you. If the government of India came to you tomorrow
[Unknown]: and asked you for advice on policy reform, what would be the first on your list that
[Unknown]: the government needs to reform? Yes, I know you tell the government not to do anything
[Unknown]: and to butt out, but this is hypothetical. So what's the first thing that you think
[Unknown]: the government needs to address? Yeah, nice question. I mean, where does one
[Amit Varma]: even start? Hamsini, of course, was my colleague at Pragati for the time that I was the editor
[Amit Varma]: there. So we were basically, she and I were the editorial team. She was based out of Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: So whenever I went there, we would have our editorial meetings at Blossom's bookstore,
[Amit Varma]: which is the best possible place to have editorial meetings, I would imagine. And
[Amit Varma]: she's always been into China, by the way, from the time I knew her, so not recent. Good
[Guest]: question. Where do I even start? I mean, Oh, no, the recent part is her actually going
[Amit Varma]: to China, immersing herself in that. Well, that's the recent part.
[Amit Varma]: She was already a scholar of China before that, and studying and learning Chinese and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. I think you need an overall mindset shift, right? If you just change one little
[Amit Varma]: thing that doesn't help, but I don't want to cop out. So okay, what are the specific
[Amit Varma]: things? I mean, easy answers would be, okay, abolish, you know, all but maybe five or six
[Amit Varma]: ministries in all the areas where you don't need them. Apart from that, yeah, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: just sort of, you know, I mean, there's so many policies that I've discussed over a period
[Amit Varma]: of time. There are, you know, urban development related policies like, you know, FSI and rent
[Amit Varma]: control, there are policies at the agricultural level, which is, you know, where we have really
[Amit Varma]: failed our farmers and shackled them for decades. And there are tons of policies with all kinds
[Amit Varma]: of externalities, you know, you should immediately shut down all PSUs, for example.
[Guest]: Can I interrupt you for a second? Sure. And prompt you a little bit because I have a feeling
[Guest]: you'll agree with me. I think the number one thing, if I had been asked that would be on
[Amit Varma]: Amit Verma's list would have been education. Yeah, allow for profit schools and don't regulate them.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had different episodes on why this is important. And it's a tragedy. It's what we have
[Amit Varma]: done to our children for decades is, you know, keeping them poor and uneducated is just a crime,
[Amit Varma]: but it's so unseen. And it's, it's, it's a crime. And yeah, I mean, I could, I could sort of
[Amit Varma]: get all emotional and upset over here. And, and I, of course, I'm one of those elites who had
[Amit Varma]: the privilege of getting a decent education, though our education system is actually completely
[Amit Varma]: shitty. I consider myself self educated, but regardless of that, whatever base one was given
[Amit Varma]: just in terms of learning the language, but extremely privileged that way. But yeah, what
[Amit Varma]: we have done to the children of our country, keeping them poor and uneducated for decades
[Amit Varma]: is a great tragedy. And every government is to blame for thinking about this the wrong way.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, that's, that's, you know, certainly one area that I can think of, but it's like,
[Amit Varma]: where do you even start if your body has like 80 cancers and, you know, 40 ulcers and all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: things going wrong and organs are falling apart. And, you know, there are every bacteria and virus
[Amit Varma]: has infected you and you say, which disease would you like to cure first? Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's like you feel like saying Bhaskar Pagle Rulaega Kya? It's, yeah, so I know that's not a
[Guest]: satisfying... I think reincarnation is the only option if we were the religious sorts. If we were
[Amit Varma]: the religious sorts. Yeah. I mean, the question is, you know, the reason I'm sort of floundering
[Amit Varma]: is that the question I've just heard the question, maybe if I'd had it a day in advance, I could
[Amit Varma]: have thought of something eloquent and a good reasoning for that. But education, you know,
[Amit Varma]: certainly, you're right that that's something that I've written about a lot. And that would
[Amit Varma]: kind of make sense. But in general, you want a mindset shift where, you know, it shouldn't be
[Amit Varma]: as if the government owned the people. The fact is, the state is there to serve the citizens and
[Amit Varma]: not the other way around. We have the opposite mindset. And we need to get past the mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know whether it's a problem of the state. I think it's a problem of the people that
[Amit Varma]: we have normalized it and we have this mindset. If you change the demand end of the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace, then the supply end will take care of itself. And but I think that, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: state is a different beast that is almost insulated from a lot of what happens in the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace, partly because of all the mistakes made in designing the state to begin with when
[Amit Varma]: we gained independence. And that's just a whole new story. And it could have been far worse. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, maybe we should just be thankful for what we have.
[Guest]: I think there is another question along similar lines. And this is by one of your biggest fans.
[Guest]: This is Sudhir Sarnobat. And I am going to play the question. And now don't say I surprised you,
[Guest]: because you've had a little bit more time to think about it. But it's basically putting
[Guest]: Modiji out of a job. So just, you know, let me play Sudhir's question.
[Unknown]: Hi Amit. Congratulations on 200th episode of Seen and Seen. Over the last 200 episodes,
[Unknown]: I have learned a lot about states, markets, economics, and Indian political history.
[Unknown]: There's a lot that's wrong with our society, politics, and overall political structure.
[Unknown]: Various themes have been discussed on Seen and Seen. Taking that thread forward,
[Unknown]: I would like to indulge you into a thought experiment. What if you are made a prime
[Unknown]: minister of India with thumping majority for, let's say, next 10 years, from 2024 till 2034?
[Unknown]: Then what are the top five initiatives that you would implement which would make India
[Unknown]: a country and a society that you have dreamed to have? Can you just give us your thoughts on this?
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, wonderful question. Sudhir is an ardent fan and supporter of the show, which I'm very
[Amit Varma]: grateful for since I opened up support in April. He also enrolled himself for the writing course
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and just keeps giving wonderful feedback, which is what I meant when,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so many of the readers feel like they have a personal stake in the show, so they want to
[Amit Varma]: constantly, you know, if they don't like something, they'll tell you about it.
[Amit Varma]: They want something else, they'll tell you about it, which, you know, and I love that.
[Amit Varma]: Makes me feel like I'm also a custodian of something that belongs to other people and
[Amit Varma]: means something to them as well. Okay, five things. I don't know. I think, where do you start?
[Amit Varma]: Now, if you are...
[Guest]: Let's start with you being elected prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean...
[Amit Varma]: So, Varmaji.
[Amit Varma]: Varmaji. So, obviously, Varmaji is never going to happen. It's absurd, but I love thought
[Amit Varma]: experiments and I appreciate that Sudhir put a thought experiment. So, I'll respect that and
[Amit Varma]: let us say that, okay, if I am ever in that kind of position of power, first of all, do an audit,
[Amit Varma]: rationalize everything the government does and think about should the government do this or
[Amit Varma]: should the government not do this. And, you know, my sort of rather heuristic for looking at what
[Amit Varma]: is wrong with the public policy or where the problem is, like if there's a particular outcome
[Amit Varma]: in the world, why is that outcome there? Where is the problem? And one heuristic I use is to
[Amit Varma]: ask the question, where is the coercion? So, I would do that in the case of government where
[Amit Varma]: I would look at different policies and say, okay, where is the coercion? Is it necessary?
[Amit Varma]: Why is it necessary? What is the impact of this? What are the outcomes that it is having? Do a
[Amit Varma]: complete audit on everything that the government does, which will immediately knock off a lot of
[Amit Varma]: the ministries, which will knock off a lot of the spending. Figure out ways to do it because even
[Amit Varma]: though you can't shift from one equilibrium to the other overnight, there are what I would call
[Amit Varma]: transaction costs in that and you got to figure out ways to make smooth transitions. But one do
[Amit Varma]: that, have a clear vision of what the government is to do, you know, and think about that. Like
[Amit Varma]: one metric that I would love using for this is Gandhiji's metric, where Mahatma Gandhi's metric
[Amit Varma]: was that for every public policy, think of whether it will help the poor or not, which is actually,
[Amit Varma]: I'm quite happy for that to be the single metric that I use for everything in terms of outcome,
[Amit Varma]: when I think about outcome, that will it help the poor or hurt the poor? And the interesting thing
[Amit Varma]: is that most of the policies that many people think of as being tailored towards the poor
[Amit Varma]: actually hurt the poor, they don't help them and vice versa. So, think a little deeper,
[Amit Varma]: think about unseen but entirely foreseeable effects and work according to that. So, rationalize
[Amit Varma]: according to what the government has no business doing, what it can do to solve poverty, which is
[Amit Varma]: our number one problem and should be our number one problem and think about it, not at the basic,
[Amit Varma]: you know, patronizing level of, you know, handouts and schemes and all of that thing.
[Amit Varma]: But think about structurally, what can we do about our poverty, how the rest of the world has
[Amit Varma]: tackled it. And therefore, that's what we need to do. So, I really start with these two. And
[Amit Varma]: the thing is, the problem with the Indian state is that it is too small and too large at the same
[Amit Varma]: time, that it doesn't do the few things it should do properly, such as maintain the rule of law,
[Amit Varma]: and so on, where basically in most of the country, there is no rule of law for elites like us,
[Amit Varma]: we can buy, figure out ways to work the system, but there is no rule of law for most people.
[Amit Varma]: So, the things that we should do strengthen the state there. And there are so many things that
[Amit Varma]: we should not do and get the state out of that as smoothly as possible. So, these are the broad
[Amit Varma]: areas, you know, I, you know, can't really think of five and all of these are in the realm of wild
[Amit Varma]: fantasy, you know, it's, but, but, yeah, I mean, if you put me in that thought experiment,
[Amit Varma]: these are the lines I along which I will think you remove restrictions on private enterprise,
[Amit Varma]: voluntary action is what what makes society grow. Now, with every act of voluntary exchange,
[Amit Varma]: both people are better off. That's the secret to prosperity. So remove all restrictions on acts
[Amit Varma]: like that, you know, if you know, there'll be one class of people in India, who will
[Amit Varma]: say that we should be free to do whatever we want in the marketplace, but not in the bedroom,
[Amit Varma]: and there'll be another class that says the opposite. And I'll say that no two consenting
[Amit Varma]: adults should be able to interact with each other in whatever way they want, as long as they're not
[Amit Varma]: infringing on the rights of someone else, be it in the bedroom or the marketplace. So get out of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the regulating people's personal morality or passing judgment on that, and also
[Amit Varma]: let them interact freely in the marketplace, unless you're doing a deal to get someone
[Amit Varma]: assassinated, in which case you're obviously infringing those rights. But otherwise respect
[Amit Varma]: the power of voluntary exchange, we do not do this enough. And this will automatically take
[Amit Varma]: care of a lot of cronyism, like people often confuse markets with business that what is good
[Amit Varma]: for markets must be good for business. And it's actually, they are at opposite ends that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a pro-business policies will be bad for markets and therefore bad for the people, because
[Amit Varma]: every big business will want to shut down competition, and, you know, put barriers to
[Amit Varma]: entry so that their position is protected, and they will want special favors from the government.
[Amit Varma]: And in the end, this harms the people, and this harms the poor. So, you know, the more we get out
[Amit Varma]: of regulating voluntary exchange, the less this kind of cronyism becomes possible. So this sort
[Amit Varma]: of a rambling answer, I hope will satisfy Sudhir. Yeah, I mean, that covers more than five, right?
[Guest]: That covers like hundreds of potential interventions or initiatives that you could implement.
[Guest]: So now, we are moving on to, I think, what is going to be one of the most exciting parts of
[Guest]: this conversation for me. I want to move on to a really exciting area. So you know, one of the
[Guest]: things I have been so jealous of, pretty much the entire time I have known you, is how broadly you
[Guest]: read, and more importantly, how quickly you read. You know, by the time I finish one book, you have
[Guest]: finished five, and I think I read a fair bit, but you just put the rest of us to shame. The other
[Guest]: thing is, you manage to read, you know, not just the same type of thing over and over again. And
[Guest]: of course, you know, being in the academy has stunted me in that we specialize in a particular
[Guest]: discipline and things like that. But you read everything, right? You're not a snob about things.
[Guest]: You may make fun of Chetan Bhagat, but you will make fun of Chetan Bhagat after reading
[Guest]: Chetan Bhagat, right? You've read everything. So there are a number of your, you know, guests and
[Guest]: fans, not surprisingly, who have questions about books. And so I want to start queuing that up and,
[Guest]: you know, ask you those questions, right? So the very first question comes from, as we have
[Guest]: discussed this multiple times in this episode, Russ Roberts, the host of Econ Talk, and one of
[Guest]: my most favorite thinkers. You know, you talked about education, and of course, I am not self
[Guest]: taught like you. I have had a lot of formal education, you know, which a lot of your listeners
[Guest]: have also, you know, learned about through various episodes. But I feel like I have learned more from
[Guest]: Russ Roberts than virtually any other book in economics or any other single professor of mine,
[Guest]: because I have been listening to his podcast since I think 2006 or 2007, from the very,
[Guest]: very early days. And he was a professor at George Mason, and that was the pull.
[Guest]: But you know, I have just learned how to think about the world through his voice. And you know,
[Guest]: through his eyes. I also think he's a remarkable human being and so incredibly kind and generous.
[Guest]: I feel like I hope somewhere that has also seeped into me maybe, you know, the I hope I have become
[Guest]: less judgmental, less critical, less snobbish, you know, more kind, more willing to listen all
[Guest]: all the things that you know, Russ just embodies. I don't know how he's been doing it for so long.
[Guest]: And so I, when I emailed Russ, he sent in a question. And in, you know, those of the listeners
[Guest]: who don't listen to Russ Roberts on Econ Talk, do so immediately. And now I'm going to play the
[Unknown]: question for you. I meet Russ Roberts here. I want to congratulate you on your 200th episode and to
[Unknown]: thank you for the opportunity to be one of those 200 on your podcast, The Seen and the Unseen was
[Unknown]: one of my favorite conversations ever. Here's my question for you. I'm going to ask you to name and
[Unknown]: recommend three books. One that has influenced your view of the world. One that enthralled you
[Unknown]: as pure entertainment, perhaps a novel or biography. And finally, one that inspired you,
[Unknown]: one that made you a better person or that touched you, such as a book of poetry, or maybe even a
[Unknown]: single poem that's special to you. Again, Amit, congratulations. Yeah, well, it's almost overwhelming
[Amit Varma]: to be asked the question by Russ Roberts, right? Because he is such a legend of both podcasting and
[Amit Varma]: and and you know, I've obviously never met him personally, but his humanity shines through his
[Amit Varma]: writing, and is therefore so inspiring. And that that episode, of course, was such a, you know,
[Amit Varma]: wonderful conversation that I did with him. I really loved it. And this reading, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: even his short book on Adam Smith is really, in a sense, a guide to how to be a better person and to
[Amit Varma]: live a better life. So I kind of love that. A book that changed my view of the world. I'm not going
[Amit Varma]: to name a libertarian book here, oddly enough, I'm going to name The Blank Slate by Steven Pinker.
[Amit Varma]: Because and what that book sort of did to me and and was that it made me much more cognizant
[Amit Varma]: and aware of human nature. And the fact that we aren't blank slates, that we have a hard wiring.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, it made me very conscious of the different ways in which our culture is both a
[Amit Varma]: reflection of the hard wiring, and also an attempt to mitigate it and to fight it, that we are wired
[Amit Varma]: in certain ways. And we are also wired in certain contradictory ways. But the most remarkable thing
[Amit Varma]: is that we are the only animal, so to say, that has been given the tools to fight its hard wiring,
[Amit Varma]: which is the ability to think about the world in conceptual terms, and to make value judgments
[Amit Varma]: about what is a good way to behave and what is the wrong way to behave. And that awareness of
[Amit Varma]: our own humanity and sort of the different ways in which you know, we are like I think of the
[Amit Varma]: brain as a machine that we have to fight, that the machine is wired to do so many things to look at
[Amit Varma]: the world and, you know, different kinds of toxic ways. And we have to fight that machine and we
[Amit Varma]: have to fight it even in more everyday mundane things like our brain is wired to be distracted,
[Amit Varma]: to take the easy way out to preserve cognitive energy and not actually do deep work. And in
[Amit Varma]: various ways, we have to kind of fight that. And the blank slate is this wonderful book that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, through this long arc shows one on the different ways in which we are shaped and
[Amit Varma]: our cultures and our societies are shaped by a wiring and be in the ways in which different fields
[Amit Varma]: have, you know, are shaped by it and also reflect sort of the different battles that then arise
[Amit Varma]: when we try to fight this and also how dangerous a view of the world would be that rejects the fact
[Amit Varma]: that we are wired and treats us as if we are blank slates when we are absolutely not. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it takes a very nuanced view of nature versus nurture. I think in one of his books,
[Amit Varma]: Pinker writes about how, you know, nature gives us knobs, nurture turns them, which I think is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, such a powerful line. That's one book, which I think changed the way
[Amit Varma]: I look at the world. Another great book, which I think sort of moves me a lot and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: has me sort of connects me deeply with the shared humanity of all of us and the shared tragedy of
[Amit Varma]: life, as it were, is a book of poems called Almost Invisible by Mark Strand. And I would
[Amit Varma]: recommend all my listeners to just go and buy Mark Strand's collected poems, because that will
[Amit Varma]: include this book, obviously. And that's a remarkable volume. And he's a remarkable poet.
[Amit Varma]: And these poems were written, I think, when he was towards the end of his life, if I'm not mistaken,
[Amit Varma]: it's his last book of poetry. And it's prose poems. Right. So it's just, it's just prose.
[Amit Varma]: And, and since Russ said, maybe I should read something out from it. Let me, let me, let me
[Amit Varma]: quickly find something to sort of read out from this. Yeah, so I'll, I have opened the page, and
[Amit Varma]: I'll read out a couple of poems are very short, and they're very powerful.
[Amit Varma]: You can always get there from here by Mark Strand, a traveler returned to the country from where he
[Amit Varma]: had started many years before. When he stepped down from the boat, he noticed how different
[Amit Varma]: everything was. There were once many buildings, but now there were few and each of them needed
[Amit Varma]: repair. In the park where he played as a child, dust filled shafts of sunlight struck the tawny
[Amit Varma]: leaves of trees and withered hedges. Empty trash bags littered the grass, the air was heavy. He
[Amit Varma]: sat on one of the benches and explained to the woman next to him that he'd been away a long time.
[Amit Varma]: He then asked her what season had he come back to. She replied that it was the only one left,
[Amit Varma]: the one they had all agreed on. I'll read out the next one now.
[Amit Varma]: Like a leaf carried off by the wind by Mark Strand. After leaving work, where he is not
[Amit Varma]: known and where his job is a mystery even to himself. He walks down dimly lit streets and
[Amit Varma]: dark alleys to his room at the other end of town in the rear of a rundown apartment house.
[Amit Varma]: It is winter and he walks hunched over with the collar of his coat turned up.
[Amit Varma]: When he gets to his room, he sits at a small table and looks at the book open before him.
[Amit Varma]: Its pages are blank, which is why he is able to gaze at them for hours.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll finally read out a third one and this is called Harmony in the Boudoir by Mark Strand.
[Amit Varma]: After years of marriage, he stands at the foot of the bed and tells his wife that she will never
[Amit Varma]: know him, that for everything he says there is more that he does not say, that behind each word
[Amit Varma]: he utters there is another word and hundreds more behind that one. All those unsaid words, he says,
[Amit Varma]: contain his true self, which has been betrayed by the superficial self before her.
[Amit Varma]: So you see, he says, kicking off his slippers, I am more than what I have led you to believe.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, you silly man, says his wife. Of course you are. I find that just thinking of you having so
[Amit Varma]: many selves receding into nothingness is very exciting, that you barely exist as you are,
[Amit Varma]: couldn't please me more. And what was the third kind of book?
[Guest]: I was about to ask you, the third question is one that enthralled you as pure entertainment,
[Guest]: perhaps a novel or a biography or something like that.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. I mean, as a biography, I love The Power Broker by Robert Caro,
[Amit Varma]: but not enthralling. It's very insightful and very interesting. I'd say I was sort of maybe,
[Amit Varma]: you know, enthralled by Lord of the Rings, for example, which is, you know, great fantasy and
[Amit Varma]: just a world building and everything. And that's a favorite of so many people. And I guess growing
[Amit Varma]: up, it's one of those books you remember for, you know, the ways in which it enthralls you.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess at the moment, I'll pick that, you know, at a later point in time, I will sort of
[Amit Varma]: regret not mentioning, I'm sure so many other books. But yeah, I would say that that certainly
[Guest]: did enthrall me. Now there are more and more questions on books. So I'm going to ask you,
[Guest]: Sukhada Choudhury's question next, right, because this is also book related.
[Unknown]: Hi, Amit. This is Sukhada. I've been a big fan of your podcast and big congratulations
[Unknown]: on completing 200 episodes of this fabulous show. And the question that I want to ask you is,
[Unknown]: if you could make sure that everyone in the world could read just one book,
[Unknown]: which book would that be? Would love to know your answer. Thanks so much and all the best.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, great question. Again, a difficult question, just one book. Yeah, I must say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, she's a fan of the show in the sense she's a supporter of the show. She keeps
[Amit Varma]: retweeting all my episodes and has kind words to say about them. I haven't really interacted
[Amit Varma]: much with her. I think I've just met her once. She organized a Vidarbha Lit Fest earlier this year at
[Amit Varma]: Nagpur where I went and where I, in fact, met a number of authors who subsequently figured on my
[Amit Varma]: show, like, you know, Madhavi Menon in that episode about the secret history of desire in
[Amit Varma]: India, which was great. And, you know, I met Rajat Ubekar there. So yeah, so over a period of time,
[Amit Varma]: I've taken three or four guests from that festival. Good question. It's also a very
[Amit Varma]: sad question. Imagine a world where people could read just one book.
[Guest]: You know, it's also a question that appreciates the opportunity cost of time if one had time just
[Unknown]: to read one book. So I am with her on this and I'm going to corner you and make sure you don't
[Amit Varma]: weasel your way out of it. No, no, I won't weasel. But I'll name more than one book because
[Amit Varma]: there's more than one sort of dimension in which this can play out. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in the realm of ideas, the book that immediately comes to mind is Bastia's The Law because of what,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the relationship between the state and the individual and the principle stand that it
[Amit Varma]: takes. But it's a difficult book to read. It's actually very simple, but the language is archaic.
[Amit Varma]: So it's kind of difficult for that reason. I mean, one could also point out, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Adam Smith's, both his books, Theory of Moral Sentiments. And though, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: if you don't have time to read both of them, you could maybe just read Russ Roberts's book on
[Amit Varma]: Adam Smith. I love Orwell's essays, but I don't know what would be the value of reading them if
[Amit Varma]: you read nothing else, because where do you get context from? Right. And similarly, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't recommend Mark Stantz's poem if it is the only book in the world, because again,
[Amit Varma]: there is no, you know, your taste would not have built up to the point where you could appreciate
[Amit Varma]: it, perhaps it would just. So it's a tough question. I think, you know, I don't know,
[Amit Varma]: maybe just, yeah. So in nonfiction, like I said, you know, maybe Bastia's Law, maybe Orwell,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know. In fiction, you could go to Orwell, you could go to something like 1984 or Animal Farm,
[Amit Varma]: which also are in their own ways, books of ideas and books that kind of contain a lot of
[Amit Varma]: truth about the world. But I mean, depending on how one is feeling, one could come up with,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a bunch of different answers. But I can't think of a satisfactory single answer
[Amit Varma]: for fiction, because the joy of fiction is that with every book, you enter a different world and
[Amit Varma]: enter other people's lives. And all of it collectively, just increases your empathy and
[Amit Varma]: makes you a better person. I mean, some book, like if somebody read only one book, you have
[Amit Varma]: to give them a book, which is also easy enough to read. So I would think... But it's not somebody,
[Guest]: right? She's asking if everybody in the world could read just one book. So there is a shared
[Guest]: context, I think, in her question, unless I'm reading too much into it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but the point is, there are many books, which are great books. But if people haven't
[Amit Varma]: read any other book, it doesn't have the same impact. Maybe something like A Curious Incident
[Amit Varma]: of the Dog in the Nighttime by Mark Haddon, which is a delightful book about a specially able child
[Amit Varma]: solving the murder mystery of his dog, and just beautiful writing. And that also gives you a sense
[Amit Varma]: of how you can enter someone's else's head and see the world differently, and yet is written in
[Amit Varma]: simple enough language that everyone can get it. So that's one sort of book that comes to mind.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, you get the fundamental difficulty with the question. And also, perhaps this is my
[Amit Varma]: shortcoming that I read so much that I am simply unable to imagine what it must be like to not
[Amit Varma]: have read anything. It's somewhat like, you know, Thomas Nagel wrote this famous essay about what
[Amit Varma]: it is to see like a bat. And, you know, which makes a philosophical point that some experiences
[Amit Varma]: are so outside of our realm that we cannot even imagine what it must be like. So yeah, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I think I've kind of edged, but I hope Sukrata will forgive me.
[Guest]: I'm an economist. And if there was only I mean, I like you can't imagine a world where
[Guest]: only one book could be read. But I would say Economics in One Lesson by Henry Hazlitt.
[Guest]: If everybody in the world read that book, then 90% of the remaining economics books don't have
[Amit Varma]: to be read in some sense. Right? Yeah. And that's, by the way, that's by the way,
[Amit Varma]: a big book based on Bastia's essay, that which is seen and that which is not seen. So it ties
[Guest]: in beautifully. It's a great book. It ties in beautifully. It's a great book. It's easy to read
[Guest]: and, you know, economic imperialism all the way, at least for now for me.
[Guest]: I have a couple more book related questions. So this is Subrat Mohanty. I don't want to say too
[Guest]: much. I want to play the question first and then talk about it. Amit. Hi, this is Subrat here.
[Unknown]: Long time listener. In fact, from the time you dropped your first episode.
[Unknown]: Congratulations on the 200th episode. Here's my question for you. Why have more people read
[Unknown]: Das Kapital than Road to Serfdom? Thanks and all the best for future.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, what a great question, isn't it?
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's not about books, but about reading, which is also a subject on which
[Guest]: is also a subject on which you have a lot of insight on how people read, how you read yourself,
[Guest]: you know, how one should read to write better, and so on, so forth. So I think this is a good
[Guest]: question of why, why the world has gravitated one way instead of another.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Subrat, by the way, is a host of a brilliant podcast called Haal Chaal Theek
[Amit Varma]: Tak Hai, which is a lovely podcast, which looks at Hindi films, and Hindi music and indeed,
[Amit Varma]: our society itself at an earlier time. And I recommend everyone listens to that. Great
[Amit Varma]: question. And I remember once when I was a teenager, and I remember this memory. And like I
[Amit Varma]: said, my father had 1000s of books across ideologies and across genres and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So I remember once, I was meeting a bunch of friends in college. And in my bag, I took the
[Amit Varma]: book Das Kapital, which he asked about because I thought it would be cool. I thought it was
[Amit Varma]: fashionable, it would make me seem intellectual, and all of that when I was a very young kid.
[Amit Varma]: Young teenager, and I think a lot of what draws us towards ideologies, as also ideological books
[Amit Varma]: is the desire to fit in and you know, with a cool gang and to be seen as, you know, one of a
[Amit Varma]: cool bunch of people and all of that, which is why we shall, you know, we will read Das Kapital
[Amit Varma]: and we'll read Marx and we'll wear t shirts of the mass murdering. Yeah, Sheikh Guwahara,
[Amit Varma]: which is which just repels me when I see someone wearing that t shirt. But yeah, so it's kind of
[Amit Varma]: those social currents where you want to fit in with a cool bunch of people. And especially if
[Amit Varma]: those cool bunch of people seem to be enlightened and they've read a lot and they're compassionate.
[Amit Varma]: Though, you know, we have seen where compassion can lead society in the 20th century, that kind
[Amit Varma]: of shallow stated compassion that remains at the level of intention. And I think that's a big reason
[Amit Varma]: why some ideologies are so fashionable and others don't really take off. Also, I think a lot of
[Amit Varma]: leftism appeals to simplistic ways of viewing the world, which are inbuilt in us. For example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, zero sum thinking or thinking of, you know, the world in terms of adversaries
[Amit Varma]: in an adversarial way that oh, then you know, the workers versus so and so and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, and these sort of simplistic narratives that the way to get rid of poverty is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just redistribute and, you know, all of that. And I can see why those are appealing.
[Amit Varma]: And so I'm not really surprised why more people have read Das Kapital than, you know, Hayek's
[Amit Varma]: books. And Hayek also writes in slightly dense language, but so does Marx, of course. And,
[Amit Varma]: and, of course, I read Marx before I read Hayek, which, you know, tells you something about the
[Amit Varma]: way the world is that many people will never even move to Hayek, which is why it's a responsibility
[Amit Varma]: of those of us who read Hayek and, you know, find illumination in him to spread those ideas
[Amit Varma]: in concrete terms and simple language. Because I think that there is a social cost to reading
[Amit Varma]: the wrong books, there is a personal cost and a social cost to reading the wrong books.
[Amit Varma]: And this is possibly the wrong time to sort of elaborate on that. But we are shaped by what we
[Amit Varma]: read. And what we then become is what shapes society, if enough of us turn out that way.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also the other thing to note is that besides Das Kapital, a book that has
[Amit Varma]: been perennially on the bestseller list in India over the years is Mein Kampf by Hitler.
[Amit Varma]: And you could also ask that that is another toxic, dangerous book. Why are people reading that? But
[Amit Varma]: because one, because I suppose at some level is enthralling and two, because it speaks to simple
[Amit Varma]: narratives that you need a strong leader. And all I mean, I used to hear these kind of arguments
[Amit Varma]: back in the day that India needs a strong leader like that. And, you know, who can get things done
[Amit Varma]: in the trains will run on time and you still hear arguments like that from people. So these are sort
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, from different end from different ideological ends, both simplistic, both dangerous,
[Amit Varma]: we have seen the damage they have caused in the 20th century with Stalin and Mao and, of course,
[Amit Varma]: Hitler himself and so on and so forth. And both having commonalities in terms of having a simplistic
[Amit Varma]: vision of the world and believing in the power of the state to shape society as you wish through
[Amit Varma]: coercive action. And we, of course, haven't learned any lessons. And I think it also, I mean,
[Guest]: the way the question was phrased, though, I know Subrata and Meena quite as literally,
[Guest]: I'm not sure so many people have read Das Kapitala, right? It's like, most people think they
[Guest]: understand the punchline or, you know, the Cliff Notes version of it. And I think that has a lot to
[Guest]: do with, you know, this lovely article that Hayek wrote called intellectuals and socialism,
[Guest]: where in a way, you know, the socialists managed to capture an intellectual elite class, who then
[Guest]: furthered and propagated those ideas, probably for all the reasons that you mentioned, which is,
[Guest]: you know, the simple narrative, the appeal to tribalism, the appeal to our base instincts of
[Guest]: thinking in terms of zero sum and things, things like that. But the liberals have not quite as well,
[Guest]: you know, penetrated the intellectual class, to then convert it into simpler messages,
[Guest]: you know, which are easy to consume, easy to repeat, easy to turn into a proverb, and, you know,
[Guest]: so on and so forth. So I think there is something to do with both the content,
[Guest]: but also the messaging, and who's doing the messaging? I have another question, which is not
[Amit Varma]: about... Before that, if I may interject, it's also, you know, this is similar of Piketty also,
[Amit Varma]: that Piketty is very fashionable these days. Almost nobody has actually read Piketty.
[Amit Varma]: But it's very fashionable, because it makes you seem both intellectual and compassionate at the
[Amit Varma]: same time. And actually, the man is just profoundly wrong in so many different ways. But you don't
[Amit Varma]: even want to enter into an argument about it with anyone, because it will seem like you,
[Amit Varma]: who has no compassion for whatever and all of that. And I would, you know, before people start
[Amit Varma]: arguing about Piketty with me, I would request them to actually read his full book, and then
[Guest]: you come and talk. Yeah, I would also recommend they read, you know, Deirdre McCloskey and Phil
[Guest]: Magnus' critique of the book, which is also not just a substantive critique, but also, you know,
[Guest]: many issues with the data, and how the data is interpreted and analyzed and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Exactly. So now I have another question on books, but this is not about your favorite book.
[Guest]: This question comes from Ram Guha. Again, one of our, you know, probably favorite writers, thinkers,
[Guest]: historians, I mean, again, someone who has multitudes, just, I mean, right now, I'm
[Guest]: excited about Guha for a completely different reason. I was reading something that he had
[Guest]: written on, you know, forest nationalization and forest rights of tribals. And my husband
[Guest]: is incredibly excited about Guha, because he's coming out with a new book on cricket,
[Guest]: right. And in this household, that I think there are very few intellectual figures who
[Guest]: excite both of us in equal measure on dimensions which are so far apart. So thanks to you. And
[Guest]: thanks to the 200th episode, I got to say hello to Ram Guha on zoom during the pandemic. And,
[Guest]: you know, get to ask this question. So I'm first going to play the question and then
[Unknown]: talk to you more about it. Hi, Abit, this is Ram Guha. And I'm here to wish you on
[Unknown]: the splendid anniversary of your fabulous program, and to request you to please write
[Unknown]: accessible book on the relevance of C. Rajagopalachari. You do not have to be a Tamil,
[Unknown]: you do not need to learn Tamil, you need to understand economics, politics and have an
[Unknown]: independent point of view, which is exactly what you have. And we need to rescue Rajaji
[Unknown]: from the fundus who are claiming him as one of their own. So please do it, Abit.
[Amit Varma]: Please do it, Abit. What a magnificent question and a difficult request.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I am possibly not capable of writing a biography. And, you know, and there are so many
[Amit Varma]: books that have yet been unwritten, the written and the unwritten could be, you know, the story
[Amit Varma]: of my life, except the first part of that would be very scant, that there are just so many things
[Amit Varma]: that I want to write, but I'm getting to but I agree with Ram that, you know, Rajaji needs to
[Amit Varma]: to have a nuanced, deep biography written on him by, you know, someone who is apart from those
[Amit Varma]: who claim him these days. I mean, it's really tragic to see what has happened, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the magazine he once founded Swarajya being the filthy rag that it is today. And it's tragic,
[Amit Varma]: but yeah, and again, it's it's kind of awesome to have to actually have someone like Ram Guha
[Guest]: ask you a question. I mean, he's asking more than a question. He's asking you to write a book.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's an even higher level compliment. Yeah, yeah, no, I would you know, I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: pass the parcel on to my readers and say that this is something that I agree with Ram that it would
[Amit Varma]: be great if somebody did it. So if one of you is up to it, you know, we have had a lot of great
[Amit Varma]: biographers on my show talk about their methods of work and all of that. So take inspiration from
[Guest]: some of that and go do it. I do, however, think that, you know, I think one incredible sort of
[Guest]: talent that Ram Guha has is to boil down an entire cultural moment into a single question. I mean,
[Guest]: something that might seem like an innocuous podcast question. But what Ram is saying is
[Guest]: like a critique on the entire right wing intellectual movement that's going on right
[Unknown]: now. Right. So that is also one of my favorite things about him. So what is said and what is
[Guest]: unsaid could be another way to think about that. And I think Pratap has the same quality, you know,
[Guest]: Ram Guha has the same quality. They're able to think and capture these big ideas and big
[Guest]: sort of cultural, political life moments and, you know, turn them into something like a question for
[Guest]: Amit Verma to write a book on Rajaji. No, I mean, Ram has so many great insights and
[Amit Varma]: thankfully he's one of those public intellectuals who keeps writing columns regularly and not just
[Amit Varma]: withdrawing to a shell in the face of severe criticism from both sides. And that makes me so
[Amit Varma]: sad. I mean, one, it does make me sad that one of the things that the troll farms of the BJP
[Amit Varma]: the BJP did after they came to power was that they sort of, you know, demonize Ram Guha and
[Amit Varma]: made him out to be, you know, a liberal historian who was against the Hindu cause and just whatever,
[Amit Varma]: which is a complete misreading of his great body of work. None of these people have read his books
[Amit Varma]: and to paint him in that manner was really tragic. And what has also happened after that is
[Amit Varma]: that today you'll have, you know, woke liberals on Twitter also ranting about Ram for different
[Amit Varma]: reasons. One of which of course is his contempt for the Gandhi family, which I entirely share
[Amit Varma]: and which we discussed on the show, I think in the Republic Day episode that we did at the start
[Amit Varma]: of the year. And, and that's really tragic because this is a great story and a great thinker of our
[Amit Varma]: times and a very nuanced thinker. So, you know, obviously both ideological tribes will reduce
[Amit Varma]: the world to a binary and anybody who doesn't fit that binary is by default, you know, a bad person,
[Amit Varma]: a bad thinker or whatever. And it's sad, but his books sell well. And I hope that, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure that, you know, within that silent majority, which is not part of the barking dogs
[Amit Varma]: of Twitter, you know, Ram has enough people who have the same sort of admiration and reverence
[Guest]: for him that, you know, you and I do. You know, another thing here is we talked about this a
[Guest]: little bit earlier when we were talking about intellectual influences and how, you know,
[Guest]: partly because the, our, you know, school curriculum is so heavily, you know, got this,
[Guest]: this colonial hangover, you know, sort of thing. We don't read whether it is in literature,
[Guest]: whether it is non-fiction, we don't read too many of our own, you know, Indian voices,
[Guest]: Indian thoughts, Indian letter. Right. And I think one thing that India after Gandhi did
[Guest]: was it just cracked that wide open. Right. It made me at least understand, and I'm a keen
[Guest]: reader of history. I mean, I'd already almost finished law school by then. You know, the,
[Guest]: I remember having this conversation with my husband, I'd given him the book, you know,
[Guest]: so it was, I think, one of the first presents that I gave him. It had released in India,
[Guest]: but it hadn't released in London. So when I was going to see him, I got the book for him.
[Guest]: And he said, I had no idea all this happened during the emergency. Right. I, on the other
[Guest]: hand, had been to law school. And, you know, I knew a lot of it from the litigation point of view,
[Guest]: but I had no idea what was going on in Nagaland, for instance. Right. And just cracking that open,
[Guest]: you know, talking about Indian events and Indian intellectual thought from the point of view of
[Guest]: what was going on with our people. I don't think anyone has done that better, you know, than Ram.
[Guest]: And in one sense, I hope that, you know, the silent majority and like the lots of people
[Guest]: who buy and read his books, we are able to create a culture of, you know, Indian thought and writing.
[Guest]: Now, it doesn't have to be liberal, it doesn't have to be centrist, it doesn't have to be right
[Guest]: wing. It could be all sorts of things, because India also contains multitudes, right. But I think
[Guest]: that is a critical piece. And I think that's also where his question is coming from, which is in
[Guest]: this homegrown intellectual thought or tradition, you know, Rajaji is an incredibly important member.
[Guest]: And if your listeners are interested in looking for their next book project, maybe one of them
[Amit Varma]: could write it. No, and more than that, I'd say that, you know, the significance of Ram Goha
[Amit Varma]: himself, let's leave aside Rajagopalachari for the moment. The significance of Ram Goha himself is,
[Amit Varma]: I think, something that perhaps he himself would not be aware of, because in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: his books are like a gateway drug for so many people into reading history, into caring about
[Amit Varma]: history. You know, would a great historian like Srinath Raghavan, for example, have less readers
[Amit Varma]: if Ram Goha did not exist? The answer clearly is yes. Maybe Srinath himself would be a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of writer if, you know, part of that way wasn't sort of laid out for him before that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's important. And this, you know, things like the books like what Ram writes can then have
[Amit Varma]: a domino effect on future historians or would be historians or people who would not have thought
[Amit Varma]: of themselves as possible historians, but who like good stories and who like reading about the past,
[Amit Varma]: suddenly reading, you know, something historical written by Ram and saying that, damn, this is so
[Amit Varma]: exciting. I need more of this. And then they read more and then they want to write more and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. And these are all unseen effects, which will, you know, play out across generations.
[Amit Varma]: And one may never know where it kind of ends up. And I wish more people express their admiration
[Amit Varma]: for him, you know, on Twitter and elsewhere, rather than the sort of vituperative space that
[Amit Varma]: it's become. And forgive me, I keep going back to that, but it's just disturbing that I know that
[Amit Varma]: I know people like, you know, Ram and Barkha Dutt and all of those probably ignored their
[Amit Varma]: Twitter notifications completely. But it just disturbs me to see the amount of sort of abuse
[Amit Varma]: and hatred that they get that what is wrong with us as a society when we cannot, you know,
[Guest]: cherish people who do such remarkable work? Yeah. And on this, I think both the left and the right
[Guest]: are pretty similar. Maybe the left has slightly better grammar and punctuation,
[Guest]: their hate and vitriol on Twitter, but I think they're about the same. I think this is where
[Guest]: conversations like yours and people like you and Russ, you know, things like that. I don't know
[Guest]: if you've noticed this, but all the people we've talked about, you know, who've asked the question,
[Guest]: I mean, one of the first few things we've said about every one of them is how kind and wonderful
[Guest]: they are. Right. And we're not just doing this as platitudes. A lot of these people I, you know,
[Guest]: we know them. When I come to India, I have lunch with you and Prem. And you know, like, we're
[Guest]: talking about you, me, Prem and Pranay at a table together is one of the nicest conversations,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that I've ever had. I've immediately remembered those dosas that we had at MTR,
[Guest]: right? Wasn't it in Bangalore? At MTR. Oh, my God, that was so good. I just, I think I killed
[Amit Varma]: your keto. And I'm not on keto. I'm not on keto, as you can probably see. I envy Bangalore people
[Amit Varma]: for that reason. You have MTR, you have Blossoms and you have Ram Guha. Speaking of that, you know,
[Unknown]: migration is always a possibility. Since we started with that theme. I have two more, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, this I know we're like way past breaking classic scene and the unseen episode records.
[Guest]: But I have a couple more sort of, you know, broad themes. One is just something you and I have
[Guest]: talked about more recently, as we have grown older, which is gratitude. Right. And so I mean,
[Guest]: I should just say out there, I'm very grateful to have the opportunity to do this. But I'm
[Guest]: particularly grateful, you know, all the guests and everyone I wrote to just instantly said,
[Guest]: Oh, my God, this is such a wonderful idea. Some of them took a little bit extra glee in saying,
[Guest]: finally, Amit will get to know how hard it is to be a guest and answer questions.
[Guest]: All of them sent their questions really promptly. Your sound engineer and producer Vijay Doipade,
[Guest]: I think I've just like, I think I've traumatized him. You know, if he quits after this,
[Amit Varma]: I apologize. But he has been wonderful. He could quit because he's my editor. There's no sound
[Amit Varma]: engineer per se, because we are recording remotely ourselves. And I'm the producer.
[Amit Varma]: But he's the editor. And as I mentioned in the introduction, a lot of the shaping of the show
[Amit Varma]: and the fact that, you know, it sounds, you know, as good as it does. And it's also smooth is all
[Amit Varma]: because of Vijay. So yeah, credit to him. But sorry, I had to interrupt. Yeah, I have to add
[Guest]: on this episode, he's also the sound engineer, because, you know, so many different clips,
[Guest]: all in different formats, all with different levels and volumes. And I just I'm very, very
[Guest]: thankful to Vijay for doing this. I'm incredibly grateful to all the guests and fans who responded
[Guest]: so warmly, and sent in questions. And I kept asking for lots of questions, because I thought,
[Guest]: you know, we have so much time. But as always, there are more ideas and thoughts and interesting
[Guest]: conversation than there is time. So, you know, we've, we've sort of covered all of it. But more
[Guest]: generally, one of the things I have, I have personally experienced being a guest on your show,
[Guest]: and I'm incredibly grateful for is two things. I have never had the kind of engagement that I get
[Guest]: from your listeners to pretty much anything else that I do. Right? I write academic papers, which
[Guest]: we all know nobody reads, right? I write columns, which people read, but you know, it's a very quick
[Guest]: and dirty, sometimes not even past the headline or the first couple of paragraphs. I've had I have
[Guest]: students who pay money to listen to me and learn from me, but not all of them are quite as engaged.
[Guest]: But there is something incredible about your listeners. And obviously, there's a selection
[Guest]: bias here, because only the most engaged reach out. But their questions are so penetrating. They
[Guest]: are so, you know, they're critical, but they are so civil. They're really like a model in my mind
[Guest]: of, you know, how discourse should be conducted. I think the way you conduct your discourse has a
[Guest]: lot to do with how your listeners respond. But I have, you know, immense gratitude for the
[Guest]: engagement from your listeners. And the second is the love. I mean, they are just ridiculous. I, I'm
[Guest]: both envious and also still quite astounded because when people are that sort of profuse in their
[Guest]: praise and warmth, I'm always like, wait a second. I mean, what do they want? Or what is going on
[Guest]: here? Is this normal? This just feels very awkward and uncomfortable. But I wanted to talk to you a
[Guest]: little bit about that. How, you know, what are you grateful for? Now that you do the show, I know how
[Guest]: much work it is to put it together. But I also know that you feel so happy and so much gratitude
[Guest]: for how it's turned out.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, two things. I mean, one, of course, to begin with gratitude towards my guests that
[Amit Varma]: they trust me, that they trust me to come on the show. They are generous with their time and their
[Amit Varma]: insights. And it's okay, you and I were friends before and people who've come on the show have
[Amit Varma]: come on the show have been friends. But there are many people who don't know me from Adam, who will
[Amit Varma]: still come on the show, and who will still sit and they will still speak with intellectual honesty,
[Amit Varma]: assuming goodwill, in good faith, and have that kind of conversation that is so enriching. So
[Amit Varma]: obviously, you know, that that's part of the whole thing that you're trusting yourself in the hands
[Amit Varma]: of a stranger, in a sense. And that's, you know, one essential thing, which is actually one reason
[Amit Varma]: why I've sort of taken it easy on having foreign guests, because I could, you know, write to
[Amit Varma]: foreign guests and get them, but they may not know me, they may not have heard that show. So that
[Amit Varma]: same level of trust isn't there, it can become a bit like a q&a, which, you know, a couple of
[Amit Varma]: episodes in the distant past have have gone that way. And it just doesn't feel like that relaxed
[Amit Varma]: conversation. So I feel much more comfortable doing an episode with someone who's probably,
[Amit Varma]: you know, heard me at some point, or at least heard of me or is willing to take that step and
[Amit Varma]: maybe listen to an episode or, you know, engage. So that's great. And the other thing, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: is like you said, the listeners, the listeners are incredible, and I don't even know what to say. And
[Amit Varma]: like you said, one of the things is not just the depth of engagement, and very often, they'll
[Amit Varma]: disagree with me, but they'll be very polite. I mean, it's a you understand the dual meaning of
[Amit Varma]: the term civil society, that they are just neatly Yeah, that they're just so polite. And you know,
[Amit Varma]: when they're engaging with you on Twitter, it seems like it seems like a world within a world
[Amit Varma]: because Twitter is otherwise so shouty and adversarial and all of that. And then you have
[Amit Varma]: this sort of very polite, reasoned engagement from folks, which I really value. I mean, the
[Amit Varma]: one thing I block for on Twitter is actually rudeness. Anyone is rude, I just block them.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and but, you know, so many of the listeners and they'll disagree with me and
[Amit Varma]: they'll say they disagree and they'll say where they disagree and whatever. And they're just so
[Amit Varma]: polite. And, and it's also kind of struck me that, you know, since I opened up support for,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when I asked people to buy me a cup of coffee from April onwards, if they enjoyed listening
[Amit Varma]: to an episode of the show, so many people were so generous. And I just want to say here that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I didn't have time to sort of, I couldn't write to each of them in person and
[Amit Varma]: thank them for it. But also, because I procrastinate, and I'm really bad at this stuff and
[Amit Varma]: email and all that. And I have literally 1000s of 100 emails and all of that. But I was blown
[Amit Varma]: away by it. It's really been enough to keep the show independent. And I appreciate that, because
[Amit Varma]: that means I don't have to, I don't have to tailor it for anybody else. But just keep going in the
[Amit Varma]: directions that I want to go. And like this episode, I think is already well over four hours.
[Amit Varma]: And I can do this, no one's going to say, you know, no one's going to come up with old fangled
[Amit Varma]: notions of who listens to something so long. And all of that. So yeah, so I'm kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'm just, in a sense, grateful to even beyond these two categories of people to guests and
[Amit Varma]: listeners to, to just dumb luck that's brought me in a situation where I've discovered something
[Amit Varma]: that gives me satisfaction and that I'm enjoying for however long it lasts. I mean, I've reached
[Amit Varma]: 200. And I think one of the questions said, may you do hundreds more. And I don't think it's going
[Amit Varma]: to happen. But it's nice to get this far and to feel that I'm still part of the journey. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, while putting together my course for podcasting, I started thinking deeper about it and
[Amit Varma]: realized that I'm still learning so much about it. And then that makes it so exciting. And that
[Amit Varma]: one can kind of go ahead and do that. Yeah, but that that's, that's broadly,
[Guest]: you know, on gratitude, I know you are grateful to your guests, but there's something incredible
[Guest]: you've done for the community, right? I spoke about this before a little bit,
[Guest]: you've cracked open an audience for a policy podcast, right? Things that people thought
[Guest]: were just impossible, you yourself thought anything longer than 20 minutes is going to,
[Guest]: you know, just not work. And you are brave enough to experiment, right? You're brave enough to put
[Guest]: it out there and say, I'm going to do this. And let's see if it works. Or if it doesn't work,
[Guest]: I'll change it. And so that is incredible. And what you've done is you've created a very keen
[Guest]: listening audience, which is different from a keen reading audience, right? It's a little bit
[Guest]: different. And there's a lot of overlap. But you've created this entire space for policy podcasts,
[Guest]: and whether it is Pawan, who's been a guest on your show, whether it's Pranay, you know,
[Guest]: whether it is Hamsini, myself, Srinath, Pooja Mehra, we've all launched our own podcast,
[Guest]: I'm sure I'm missing a few people. And so much of our initial audience has come from the seen
[Guest]: and the unseen, or because of some recall value, right? That, oh, I heard them on the seen and the
[Guest]: unseen, and I enjoyed that episode. And I would love to listen to them. And in that sense, you
[Guest]: know, you really are sort of a model for how to create a market, how to expand it. And it also
[Guest]: takes generosity and mentorship. I know you've mentored each one of us, I've never heard you say,
[Guest]: hey, I'm doing this. So I don't want you to do the same thing, you would be as generous,
[Guest]: you know, to someone who is launching the seen and the unseen part two versus, you know, someone
[Guest]: who's doing something very remote from what you're doing, or someone who's doing it in a different
[Guest]: language. And, and I think that policy podcast space, you know, at least I'm very grateful,
[Guest]: and a lot of us are grateful that you exist. The other thing I think people are grateful for is
[Guest]: the books, right? I mean, I watch this on Twitter all the time, there are people who have shelves
[Guest]: in their homes, which are the seen and the unseen shelf, right? Which is all the book recommendations
[Guest]: that they got from your show, and then they picked up those books, and they enjoyed reading it.
[Guest]: And that, of course, creates this whole other ecosystem, whether it is, you know, publishers,
[Guest]: I know many publishers are vying to get their next book launched on your show and things like that.
[Guest]: But even book authors, you know, someone who spent a couple of years writing a book,
[Guest]: the kind of very sympathetic and generous profiling you'll give, you know, like you said,
[Guest]: you're not one of those literary festival spiels, where you talk to five people for 10 minutes,
[Guest]: and they come with this programmed spiel about their book. This is a very different kind of
[Guest]: conversation, whether it's profiling the author. So I think all of these things I am very grateful
[Guest]: for, like there are so many books, I wouldn't have discovered, I never read as much history,
[Guest]: you know, before I started listening to the show, it was more policy and economics and things like
[Guest]: that. You know, I mean, something like, you know, I mean, Chitmai, of course, is an economist,
[Guest]: so I would have, you know, read him, but something like Ira Mukherjee's book, right,
[Guest]: would have not been anywhere on my radar, for instance, right, or the book with Anshul Malhotra
[Guest]: on partition, right, I would have just, you know, thought, oh, this is a sentimental,
[Guest]: sweet memoir sort of thing, you know, I'll read it later. And, and the way I have the discovery
[Guest]: process is another thing I'm grateful for. It's not getting an annoying mailer. It is not a
[Guest]: publisher, like bombarding you with things. It's someone really thoughtful, who is carefully
[Guest]: putting this together, you know, for an entire community building out other ecosystems. So that's
[Guest]: another thing I'm very grateful for, as far as your podcast is concerned. I'll just say a couple
[Amit Varma]: of things. One is that, you know, it's, you make me sound like a great sort of philanthropist,
[Amit Varma]: you know, doing so much for the world, but actually, it's all out of self interest, right.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a great way of how self interest and altruism are really the same thing. They come
[Amit Varma]: together. You know, when you have voluntary interactions, so so so yeah, it's not like a grand
[Amit Varma]: plan, or that I'm going to do this, I'm going to do that I'm going to make people read more,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to do whatever, whatever that has happened has happened, you know, has been an
[Amit Varma]: unseen and actually unforeseen effect. It has been organic has been an unforeseen effect of my just
[Amit Varma]: following my own intellectual journey and my curiosities and kind of getting there. So I feel
[Amit Varma]: as I feel blessed. And the other side of it is as far as helping others is concerned, is that I think
[Amit Varma]: there was a time when I was much younger, when I might have been competitive about it. What helps
[Amit Varma]: me not be competitive at all, is the sense that I am making something across time, which is,
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, and broadly, like I said, I'm also making the show for listeners of 30 years
[Amit Varma]: later. And that approach is something I come to almost out of necessity. Because I think I have
[Amit Varma]: realized that as far as the ways I think about the world and my ideas and all of that, it's
[Amit Varma]: basically, you know, it's, it's, it's kind of a lonely road. And even in terms of success,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I might not achieve any kind of success with anything I do immediately or in the short
[Amit Varma]: run. That's the default attitude I've taken after all these years of doing whatever I have done,
[Amit Varma]: because I have sort of been on the margins of every community I've been sort of involved with,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, and I'm used to people not taking me seriously. So I figured that, okay, I'm not going
[Amit Varma]: to bother about all that and think about present day validation and riches and all of that. I'm
[Amit Varma]: just going to do something I love. And maybe, you know, 30 years later, people can look back and
[Amit Varma]: say, okay, these were great conversations. And I know that sounds very vain and arrogant for
[Amit Varma]: anyone to imagine that he can create something of value, even for the present moment as an act of
[Amit Varma]: arrogance. But to say that 30 years later, people will be listening to this or reading me is even
[Amit Varma]: more so. But, you know, what do you do? That's what you do, right? So, no, I don't, I don't
[Guest]: completely agree on this, probably because I've known you a long time. Even when there were real
[Guest]: space constraints, like say, you know, columnness, you know, and things like that, whether you were
[Guest]: a blogger, which was a little bit less constrained, I have seen this quality in you across all the
[Guest]: things that you have done or engaged in, you immediately build a community, you reach out to
[Guest]: other people doing the same thing, you encourage them, you have honest discussions about how to do
[Guest]: it better, right? You you don't compete on those margins, you may, you may compete on quality,
[Guest]: or, you know, making a better argument or writing a better post, but you've never really competed on
[Guest]: those margins. I think so many of us got our first break, you're the first person who ever told me
[Guest]: to write, you're the person who introduced me to Niranjan Rajyadheek, who was my first editor,
[Guest]: who told me to write in a newspaper, and you know, so on and so forth. And I know I'm not the only
[Guest]: one who has benefited either from that generosity or that mentorship. So I don't think I think this
[Guest]: is something a little bit more inherent in your personality. I'm this is the last nice thing I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to say. So you know, take it, you know, I remember, I remember, you know, Hamsini once
[Amit Varma]: said something nice about me at one point in time. And I told her that she was committing the Salman
[Amit Varma]: Khan fallacy. Have I told you about the Salman Khan fallacy? No, but I must suffer through it.
[Amit Varma]: So go for it. Yeah, you must suffer through it. The Salman Khan fallacy is that just because
[Amit Varma]: someone is nice to you, you imagine they're nice people. I didn't say you're a nice person. Yeah,
[Unknown]: but I mean, no, no, no, no, no. For our listeners, Amit is very grumpy. Amit can be really like a
[Guest]: annoying, grumpy, he can be very, very irritable about so many things. He lacks patience, he doesn't
[Guest]: travel well. You know, he will complain about traffic and New York City restaurants. So yes,
[Guest]: so the long list of things about how annoying Amit is and how he's not a very nice person exists.
[Guest]: Having said that, no, but there is something very generous about you. And there is a great
[Guest]: mentorship model that you have created. And this is not because you've been personally kind to me,
[Guest]: it's because I know lots of people like me who benefited from it. It's a matter of creating
[Guest]: an ecosystem. It's about creating a community. I think this community creation is underrated.
[Guest]: You know, whether it is talking about the mailing lists you create, the WhatsApp groups that you've
[Guest]: created, all of this, you've always brought people who I normally wouldn't have encountered and put
[Guest]: us in a space together. That obviously also creates friction and we have arguments and
[Guest]: intellectual disagreements. Sometimes we are complaining behind each other's backs,
[Guest]: can you believe so-and-so wrote that or so-and-so said that on Twitter. But still,
[Guest]: the value of creating that community and engagement is incredible. And I will give
[Guest]: you credit for doing that. By the way, the most annoying thing about you is that you don't like
[Amit Varma]: sugar. May I just put that out there? No, I don't like sugar at an abstract level. Sugar is poison,
[Amit Varma]: I know that. But at a concrete level, I keep getting drawn back to it time and time again.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I had a very successful period on keto where I lost 20 kgs. But after that,
[Amit Varma]: I went off keto and put back 22. So in fact, I've been sort of by the time you listen to this,
[Amit Varma]: hopefully I'd be like at least a week into my new discipline routine. But then you know,
[Amit Varma]: so there are, you know, people seem to think from my output that you must be so disciplined and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. I'm just a freaking opposite. So... No, you are disciplined on certain
[Guest]: intellectual margins. You have a lot of discipline when you write, when you teach,
[Guest]: when you engage. I mean, those are incredible qualities. But you're also a very annoying person
[Unknown]: to go to lunch with because you'll immediately talk about how many carbs there are in the
[Amit Varma]: MTR masala dosa and things like that. Noted. I did eat all the MTR masala
[Unknown]: dosas the last time we were at lunch. While complaining loudly instead of just
[Unknown]: quietly enjoying the moment. We'll put a picture out, you know, maybe on Twitter or in the show
[Unknown]: notes. There's a great photograph of this lovely event of, you know, Amit and me enjoying masala
[Guest]: dosas just pre pandemic. We have reached the end. And I have three quick questions for you.
[Guest]: These come from guests and fans. And I think, you know, they're, they're sort of like the perfect
[Guest]: questions to end on. So I want you, you know, the first we're going back to Chinmay. Chinmay is like
[Guest]: having this, you know, Salman Khan style stardom on this episode. Very much well deserved. But he
[Guest]: asked another great question in addition to the first one. So, you know, let me play Chinmay's
[Unknown]: question and everyone will know why when we discuss it. Hi Amit, this is Chinmay Tumbe here.
[Unknown]: Congrats on your 200th episode. We all know how much you love TikTok. And so my question for you
[Unknown]: is, if you had to record a TikTok video for 20 seconds, what would it be? Wow, fantastic question.
[Guest]: There's so many different. Yeah. So let me first preface with Amit, as you all know, loves TikTok
[Guest]: or, you know, before it got banned. And another lovely thing about Amit is he always knows what
[Guest]: the future looks like and he's not at all snobbish or elitist or classist about it. He used to send
[Guest]: me TikTok videos all the time. And at one point it was so many that I couldn't keep up with them.
[Guest]: The first time he told me about TikTok, Amit sent me 45 videos on WhatsApp. And I was like,
[Guest]: are you kidding me? You want me to watch all of them? And he said, yeah, this is going to be
[Guest]: great for you. And it again, opened my mind into another subculture. So two things, you know,
[Guest]: before you answer Chinmay's question, tell us a little bit about your fascination with TikTok
[Guest]: and then tell us what TikTok video you would make. Yeah. So I'm glad you asked that first
[Amit Varma]: question because it gives me some time to sort of get away from us answering the second one,
[Amit Varma]: which I don't yet have an answer for. But no, my fascination for TikTok is because of,
[Amit Varma]: I think, one, of course, the quality of the creativity within TikTok, if you look at it.
[Amit Varma]: And two, I think it, like I taught a course called, I put together a course called TikTok
[Amit Varma]: in Indian society. I taught only one batch of it because TikTok was banned by then. So there was
[Amit Varma]: no way for, I mean, I had all the videos downloaded and I taught it on WhatsApp because that's the
[Amit Varma]: only way to send people hundreds of vertical format videos. And then I decided no point
[Amit Varma]: doing it again because people can't actually see TikTok. But the reason I was blown away for it
[Amit Varma]: is that I think it gave a voice to people who did not otherwise have a voice before that.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I think a couple of things happened in India simultaneously. One is that broadband
[Amit Varma]: on smartphones became much more widespread, I won't say ubiquitous, became much more widespread
[Amit Varma]: at a certain point in time, partly because of what Jio was doing. And forget Jio's means of
[Amit Varma]: getting there and the cronyism that might or might not be involved. But the bottom line was that
[Amit Varma]: broadband became much more accessible to many more people. And then along came an app which
[Amit Varma]: actually empowered them by, you know, allowing them to showcase their own creativity. Now,
[Amit Varma]: here's the thing. If you think of popular culture in India, you know, popular culture in India has
[Amit Varma]: gatekeepers and is run by elites. For example, just take Bollywood. I mean, I know there are
[Amit Varma]: film industries across the country. Let's take one of them. Let's take Bollywood, where if you
[Amit Varma]: look at the, there are two different kinds of elites which dominate Bollywood today though
[Amit Varma]: is gradually changing. And one is that old school elite who have their old school regressive
[Amit Varma]: attitudes, which they bring into everything. And the other is perhaps their kids who have gone
[Amit Varma]: abroad and studied and come back and they're like the woke elites and they've got a different
[Amit Varma]: conception of what entertainment is and what they should do with it. But they're both out of touch
[Amit Varma]: with the real India, which is not a judgment on either of them. But you know, they're in cities
[Amit Varma]: and they've lived different lives and they're out of touch with the real India. And what TikTok did
[Amit Varma]: was that it did, it changed this at two levels. One is that it allowed anyone to create anything
[Amit Varma]: without a gatekeeper being there and put it up. Two, as consumers, it made them realize that
[Amit Varma]: there is a world of entertainment out there on TikTok, which has not come through these gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: and which reflects their lives and their values and their struggles. And you see this in various
[Amit Varma]: little niches, for example, the LGBTQI community, where you have an outpouring of incredible
[Amit Varma]: creativity and self-assertion, confident self-assertion from them on TikTok, because suddenly
[Amit Varma]: so many people realize that they are not alone, that there are so many others like themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And it's one thing to be an English speaking, marginalized person in a city and to be able to
[Amit Varma]: go on the internet and see people like yourself and connect with people like yourself. But if you
[Amit Varma]: don't know English, if you're in a village somewhere or whatever, and you might feel that you are a
[Amit Varma]: freak, it will affect your self-image and the way you live your life and all of that, which I think
[Amit Varma]: was, you know, true for marginalized people over decades. And suddenly along comes this app and on
[Amit Varma]: this app, you see that, you know, that you are not alone in a sense that there are people in identical
[Amit Varma]: social conditions to yours and identical orientations to yours who are expressing
[Amit Varma]: themselves powerfully and the kind of sort of create. And obviously, a lot of the creativity
[Amit Varma]: is the lowest form of humor. There'll be puns and there'll be memes getting played out. But there's
[Amit Varma]: also a lot of sophisticated humor. There's also a lot of heartbreaking stuff and some insane
[Amit Varma]: creative talent on TikTok, like, my God, so good, you know, and then it got banned. And it's
[Amit Varma]: such a tragedy. I feel like it's personal that it's, I mean, I just feel so sad about it. It's
[Amit Varma]: horrible. And it also tells you the happenstance that if that particular app which worked like that
[Amit Varma]: didn't come across at that particular time, this would not have happened. And now you've left them
[Amit Varma]: high and dry again. But the question here for entrepreneurs and for people who, you know, feel
[Amit Varma]: the way I do is that think of the unknown unknowns of the future, what are the ways in which you can
[Amit Varma]: sort of fill some of these gaps that even people may not know exist, people in those gaps may not
[Amit Varma]: know exist. And, you know, and there's so much hope for doing something there. And that moment
[Guest]: is lost to us. I mean, it's weird to think of it in terms of gaps, right? Like, I mean, a gap exists
[Guest]: if you know that there is a world that fits in a particular way. And, and there are things like
[Guest]: Twitter, or, you know, initially, when people said 140 characters, well, you're going to tell
[Guest]: them I got, you know, a macchiato today morning or something like that. Right. And then Twitter
[Guest]: became this point of reference for everyone, it became something that can change elections,
[Guest]: it can be some, it became something where that can lead to revolutions, because people know where to
[Guest]: congregate on in the middle of the city or something like that. And it's just become this
[Guest]: extraordinary platform, right. And I think TikTok did something similar. And it goes to show how
[Guest]: powerful it was, if the biggest threat you can be to the Chinese is to take away a massive audience
[Guest]: or consumer base from TikTok, then you know how, how much it penetrated and how powerful it was.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think the ban was even well thought out in political terms, because this base was not
[Amit Varma]: a threat to Modiji. This was kind of part of his base. You know, like there were stories after TikTok
[Amit Varma]: was banned, I think Shortik Biswas did a story on BBC and he, I think we chatted that morning,
[Amit Varma]: because he took a quote from me and Shortik pointed out how all the TikTok creators he had
[Amit Varma]: spoken to were actually confident it would be repealed because they were fans of Modiji. And
[Amit Varma]: they said, okay, he'll repeal it. But the other point that I kind of want to make here is that
[Amit Varma]: the loss is not just that a niche is not being served, but that it is not being discovered.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the points I make in my podcasting course about the difference between radio and
[Amit Varma]: podcasting is that because radio out of necessity has to be so broad, that not only can it not
[Amit Varma]: serve certain niches, they don't even discover those niches and those niches don't discover
[Amit Varma]: themselves. And you see, for example, in the newsletter, if you go to the top paid newsletters
[Amit Varma]: at Substack, and you'll see so many niches being covered there that Bill Bishop is doing
[Amit Varma]: cynicism, which is a newsletter on China, and it is such a huge hit and is making him so much money
[Amit Varma]: and who would have thought that niche existed. Emily Oster is, you know, doing the economics
[Amit Varma]: of parenthood and pregnancy and all of that. And that's a hugely popular newsletter. And there is
[Amit Varma]: that niche, you know, even the seen and the unseen serves a particular kind of niche. If I had to
[Amit Varma]: apply for a license for a podcast, and I told someone I'm going to do three hour interviews
[Amit Varma]: with intellectuals who write obscure books, like no way, man, it's crazy. I myself would have thought
[Amit Varma]: it was crazy, crazy. I discovered it by the serendipity of just get being able to do it in
[Amit Varma]: the technology existing. And I think tiktok served some of that. Yeah. And now I'm not going to let
[Amit Varma]: you weasel your way out of Chinmay's question. Chinmay's question if I had to do? I don't know,
[Amit Varma]: man. I've never actually thought about it. Because tiktok is the one sort of medium where I was just
[Amit Varma]: a pure consumer. I never fantasized about doing something on it. So I have, I have no idea if
[Amit Varma]: tiktok existed, I would take it up as a challenge and maybe do something. And maybe fulfill Ram
[Amit Varma]: Guha's request as well and do something on Rajaji. I can't, you know, nothing really comes to mind,
[Amit Varma]: I guess I'd pick up an existing meme and subvert it in some way and just kind of run with that.
[Amit Varma]: But I think the thing with tiktok, if I were to start a channel just thinking aloud,
[Amit Varma]: I think I'd start off doing mundane, boring things, which in retrospect would seem horrible.
[Amit Varma]: But then over a period of time, it would evolve. And it would probably be my 100 video,
[Amit Varma]: which would be nice. And my 3000 video, which which would be incredible. And then I would get
[Guest]: into my groove. So I'm surprised you didn't mention your limerick. I thought that would
[Guest]: have been perfect for tiktok, right? The limericks that you used to write for Times of India,
[Guest]: they're almost like crafted for that 20 second video, they have humor,
[Guest]: they are current, they are political. You don't think that's a good fit? That's just
[Amit Varma]: completely different. That's kind of you, but they're English. And I don't think that's a
[Amit Varma]: good fit. I think I'd find out, you know, with my creativity, I'd figure out things to do.
[Amit Varma]: But I never even thought about it. Because it and also anybody who gets on tiktok,
[Amit Varma]: their first few videos will always be shit, even the best creators. It's after a period of time
[Amit Varma]: that you begin to find moments of magic. And I say moments of magic, because tiktok has just
[Amit Varma]: given me so many moments of transcendent magic and just watching something over and over again
[Amit Varma]: and saying, like, WTF, like, I have not seen anything like this anywhere else.
[Guest]: Yeah, for me, the dancing, I mean, the humor and the dancing were the two things which I was
[Guest]: astounded by one that people could actually move like that. And that, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: Indian humor is very specific, right? It's not like your typical American stand up comedy humor.
[Guest]: Some of it, as you mentioned, is quite misogynistic, it can be quite regressive.
[Guest]: But a lot of the humor there, like some of the satire was just really high quality.
[Guest]: The other thing you can potentially do on tiktok is tell PJs because you specialize in PJs.
[Guest]: It is entirely my quality control that no such terrible PJs have occurred on this
[Unknown]: on this episode. And I say occurred because they are like a disaster.
[Amit Varma]: No, if I do a video of me telling a PJ, I would you would find me instructing a pajama. See,
[Amit Varma]: are you happy now? This is what you do. This is what you asked for.
[Amit Varma]: Let's let's move on to the next question. And apologies to Tinmay.
[Amit Varma]: If tiktok is ever back in India, I promise that just for Chinmay, I'll
[Unknown]: make a video of some sort and show him.
[Guest]: Okay, the next question is probably your big from your biggest fan ever.
[Guest]: This is Vinayak on Twitter, right? And I know him only from Twitter. He
[Guest]: absolutely loves your show. I think he he even sometimes beats you before you manage to,
[Guest]: you know, release the show online and things like that. He's also just really wonderful,
[Guest]: very engaged, very spirited person on Twitter. I love engaging with him.
[Guest]: So this is Vinayak's question to you.
[Unknown]: Question to you. Hi, Mitza. Hi, Shruti.
[Unknown]: I want to thank you for enriching my life and lives of many other unseen listeners of the show.
[Unknown]: So many of my great moments in recent times have been from engaging with you
[Unknown]: and learning from you. So I'd like to know what is the best moment of your life. Also,
[Unknown]: I have a request. Can you start a publication community like Yashas Persuasion
[Unknown]: and persuade all the intellectuals from the podcast to come together for the project?
[Unknown]: And finally, please never stop making episodes for seen and unseen. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's that's a really nice question and a nice sentiment. And
[Amit Varma]: Vinayak is a pseudonym. I do happen to know his real name, but he's got reasons for why he
[Amit Varma]: calls himself Vinayak. So we shall respect that and call him Vinayak as well. And often I have
[Amit Varma]: found that he has retweeted a tweet of mine before I have even tweeted it. It almost feels like that
[Amit Varma]: he is so incredibly prompt. Best moment of my life? I don't really know. I have sort of now
[Amit Varma]: one our memory is sort of tainted by who we become at any particular point in time. So
[Amit Varma]: we look at memories differently. And do I have come to the point where I have learned to
[Amit Varma]: consciously think about taking joy from small things. So the best moment in my life might have
[Amit Varma]: been a little thing that happened today, for example. So it's really hard to say.
[Amit Varma]: But as he's the Kachori, but as he's gone to the effort of asking the question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I won't go into the personal happy moments because I like to keep the personal
[Amit Varma]: out of the podcast and all of that. So I'll leave that aside. But apart from that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I think winning the two Bastia prizes was great, especially because I had friends around me when I
[Amit Varma]: won them. And the second time I got to celebrate with you and Nandu and Yazad and all the other
[Amit Varma]: friends who were there. But I don't, I don't know. I think that somehow, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how does one even define happiness? It's, you know, and does happiness exist when you
[Amit Varma]: consciously think about a moment and you say, I am happy now? If you just experience it without
[Amit Varma]: without classifying it like that, is it happiness? Can there be, for example, the quiet happiness of
[Amit Varma]: enjoying a sunset without my thinking about it and therefore classifying it as a happy moment?
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so there are, as usual, I've got a little meta and ask these meta questions. So
[Amit Varma]: I don't really know, maybe happiness is would be personal moments that I wouldn't want to share
[Amit Varma]: here. But, you know, even in terms of my sort of professional career or whatever, I don't know,
[Amit Varma]: it's very hard to say. And, you know, I know that tomorrow, I'm going to regret this. And I'll think,
[Amit Varma]: oh, I should have given this answer. And you, of course, did not give me time to prepare
[Amit Varma]: answer as much as I do to so many of my guests, they could say, so this is a sweet revenge.
[Guest]: I think there's a trade off between being genuinely surprised and spontaneous and being
[Guest]: very prepared. Let me rephrase, you know, when I expressed a little bit differently, maybe I
[Guest]: don't know if you want to put pressure on yourself for that one single happy moment when you know,
[Guest]: something like the Bastiat prize, especially the second time stands out. But what I've noticed
[Guest]: about you is that you're a really grumpy, irritable, introverted person who wants to
[Guest]: complain about everything. But it's the smallest things that make you happy. Right? I mean,
[Guest]: you get really happy if you eat good luchi at O'Calcutta and break your keto diet. Or you get
[Guest]: really happy if you've read a beautiful poem. And you're like, oh, my God, this was amazing.
[Guest]: Or you get really happy if you've had a fantastic class or workshop and someone said amazing and
[Guest]: something amazing in that class. And you're like, that made me think or you know, like that
[Guest]: conversation with Karthika that you mentioned at the top of the show. So what I've noticed is that
[Guest]: I have observed about your happiness is that it's very spontaneous and fleeting. And it's always in
[Guest]: the little things. It's not in like some grand prize and design and things like that. You're
[Guest]: quite a happy person in everyday life, despite your middle aged grumbling. Yeah, that's a middle
[Amit Varma]: aged grumbling is a nice description. I'd say I broadly have a pessimistic view of the world in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that life has no meaning and we're all going to die. And that's it. But within that,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, how do you cope with that? What is your coping mechanism? Maybe at some point,
[Amit Varma]: the coping mechanism doesn't work. But right now, it would be to, you know, just find joy in your
[Amit Varma]: work and happiness in the small things. I mean, I'm sounding very much like a self help guru and
[Amit Varma]: all of that now. And I'm also sounding I'm sure incredibly ungrateful to all the people who've
[Amit Varma]: given me happy moments that I don't think of those or they don't kind of automatically come to mind.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, conceptually, what is happy, I can look back on a memory that has happened and
[Amit Varma]: classify it in retrospect as happy, even if in that particular moment, it might have been some
[Amit Varma]: other elation, such as an unseemly pride or whatever, going through me. I mean, memory is
[Amit Varma]: a strange thing, right? Like, you know, the way memory works is, and of course, I discussed memory
[Amit Varma]: in great detail in with Anshul in the episode I did with her, which another episode I enjoyed a
[Amit Varma]: lot. But, you know, memory strange in the sense that the way our brain works is that the first
[Amit Varma]: time we remember, remember something, we remember it. But the second time we remember it, we are
[Amit Varma]: remembering the remembering. And across time, therefore, memory becomes fiction. It becomes
[Amit Varma]: fiction. So in that sense, and we are inventing our own fiction and adding to it as we go along.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, I can I can look back on past events on my life as either happy or unhappy in
[Amit Varma]: retrospect. And maybe then that happiness that I remember is a happiness now of remembering it,
[Amit Varma]: which makes this the happy moment, rather than that itself. Okay, you're a terrible guest on
[Unknown]: your own show. We can't get a straight answer out of you. Everything becomes very meta, meta,
[Unknown]: meta. And so I'm just yeah, I'm you're a terrible, terrible guest. I'm glad you picked the job of
[Amit Varma]: the host. You know, I'll tell you something. Meta is the only damn thing I'm good at.
[Amit Varma]: So and now to move on to Vinayak's second question, which was about why don't I start a
[Amit Varma]: publication like Yashamong's Persuasion? It's you know, so I was editor of Pragati, which is a
[Amit Varma]: magazine of ideas and policy and whatever. And one of the problems with something like that is
[Amit Varma]: just finding enough writers that do we have such a rich ecosystem full of intellectuals where
[Amit Varma]: you can get enough content out regularly? And, you know, and if I were to make a list of just
[Amit Varma]: a guest on my show, the answer would seem like yes, but then you have to get them to write
[Amit Varma]: regularly and all of that. And it just didn't feel at that time, like it would be worthwhile,
[Amit Varma]: maybe when the ecosystem is richer, maybe 20 years later, or 10 years later, maybe someone
[Amit Varma]: could do that. But if I were to do that, I think that there's a danger that it would just fizzle
[Amit Varma]: out that they wouldn't be that I'd be working much harder than I would like to, to try and
[Amit Varma]: get people to write for it. And there just wouldn't be enough of them. And I think that that's kind of
[Amit Varma]: the thing with the intellectual ecosystem. That is one thing that you know, people can have the
[Amit Varma]: generosity to come on my show for three hours and have a relaxed conversation and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But actually writing and then writing regularly is a whole different ballgame. So just speaking
[Amit Varma]: from my own experience of trying to do a version of it, it's difficult. I have had various ideas
[Amit Varma]: at times for media startups in the sense that I think that the way people consume and discover
[Amit Varma]: content in India has changed radically over the last 10 years and no publication mainstream or
[Amit Varma]: otherwise gets it. So I've often thought that why don't I try to fill the gap and
[Amit Varma]: do interesting things, but I just don't have the appetite to be an entrepreneur. And the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: everything has an opportunity cost. The scene in the unseen takes some time and I want to get down
[Amit Varma]: to writing books, which is what I'm trying to do now. And you know, which is the one thing I've
[Amit Varma]: always wanted to do. And if I don't do more of that, I'll sort of that's the one thing I'll
[Amit Varma]: regret. So that's what I'm trying to get down to. So I'm not sure I really have the time and that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, yeah, so that that's kind of a short answer. And as to the third thing,
[Amit Varma]: when I said that, he hopes I keep doing it forever. Look, I love doing it. So I'll keep
[Amit Varma]: doing it for as long as I can. But, you know, one doesn't even live forever. So who is to say?
[Guest]: Now we are finally I promise the listeners at the very end. And here is the last question.
[Guest]: And it's quite fitting. It's from one of our mutual friends, Mohit Satyanand. We talked about,
[Guest]: you know, the that voice or a great voice is not important for podcast the way it is for radio.
[Guest]: But Mohit is one of those people. I mean, he's an incredible person and entrepreneur,
[Guest]: just such a kind, wonderful person and mentor, but has the most remarkable voice,
[Guest]: which is completely wasted in his day job in his regular life. And I feel like, you know,
[Guest]: he could read, I don't know the yellow pages and, and it would still be amazing to listen to him.
[Guest]: So here's Mohit's question. And you are going to complain I didn't give you more time,
[Guest]: but for what it's worth, here it is.
[Unknown]: Amit, how would you like your epitaph to read?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. Mohit is, of course, a dear friend. I almost think of him as family in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: like when I go to Delhi, I stay over at Mohit and Premi's place and just I have great love for him.
[Amit Varma]: He asked me this question on WhatsApp a few days ago, by the way. And it's not such a difficult
[Amit Varma]: question to answer because and the answer will seem like a cop out. But it's a genuine answer
[Amit Varma]: that I don't care. I mean, I'll be gone. So what difference does it make what my epitaph
[Amit Varma]: reads? I mean, I don't have the vanities of leaving a legacy and all and this might seem
[Amit Varma]: at odds with what I said earlier about creating a show for 30 years later and all of that. But
[Amit Varma]: it gives me pleasure to think that I'm sort of, I might be able to create that kind of content.
[Amit Varma]: But once you're gone, you're gone. So it doesn't really matter. You know, the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: I don't anymore have the vanities that I did as a much younger person that I will imagine that I
[Amit Varma]: can change the world in some way or that my ideas have great meaning or resonance or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know, I'm kind of, I'm kind of pessimistic about, you know, any epitaph. It's
[Amit Varma]: just, you know, one does what one does. But I think you're thinking of it too literally,
[Guest]: right? An epitaph has two purposes. One, of course, it's you're leaving something behind
[Guest]: in the world to be remembered by and things like that. The other is, it's also a very pithy way
[Guest]: of summing up a very rich, large, fulfilled life. So I will ask you Mohit's question from the
[Guest]: second point of view, not from a point of view of vanity, but like, what would you want to be known
[Guest]: for? What would you like the life to add up to? Okay, tough question. Like you said, no preparation.
[Amit Varma]: There are different aspects to it. I mean, one can break it down and say that what would you,
[Amit Varma]: like the way you phrased it, what would you like to be remembered for? Or the other way of looking
[Amit Varma]: at it is like, what would you have liked to achieve, have achieved in your own life? Like
[Amit Varma]: if I am on my deathbed and I look back, what is my epitaph to myself? And the thing is, the answers
[Amit Varma]: would be completely different. And in the first case, at some level, when people look back,
[Amit Varma]: it's fleeting. Yeah. You know, maybe as someone who, you know, engaged with the world with
[Amit Varma]: intellectual honesty, or made people think about the world a little differently. That would be
[Amit Varma]: nice. You know, the things I want to be remembered for are things that I want to go ahead and do,
[Amit Varma]: such as in the books I write, and not anything that I have done yet. So if you're expecting me
[Amit Varma]: to say that in someone who had great conversations on a podcast, that's not my answer. I'm very happy
[Amit Varma]: to have done this. But I don't think it's that memorable that people will remember. It's not
[Amit Varma]: the iconic status of econ talk, for example, 750 episodes or whatever. But even otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: I, you know, what one would like to do in an ideal world is that you want to sort of
[Amit Varma]: let your ideas reach far and wide, you know, the way Bastia's ideas reach me,
[Amit Varma]: but it is such vanity to expect to have that kind of an impact on people. And also, I grew
[Amit Varma]: less and less hopeful of that happening. But I want to sort of increase the probability of that
[Amit Varma]: happening by at least doing everything I can to that end, which involves writing the books and
[Amit Varma]: continuing this podcast, so that when I can others can enjoy listening to it. So I guess that's it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is just, you know, I don't know. What's your answer, dude? To my epitaph? Yeah.
[Guest]: Or your epitaph? No, to your epitaph. It's a good question. See, and I did have lead time. See,
[Guest]: I think my epitaph is gonna say something like, tell your dog I said hi. You know, it's gonna be
[Guest]: something very simple, something that brings me joy. You know, this is the perfect spot for your
[Guest]: dog to be. That's probably what the tombstone and the epitaph is worth, if I was being facetious.
[Guest]: But it would be something really simple. I don't, I mean, I certainly don't think of myself as like
[Guest]: a public intellectual of your caliber or anything like that. But I think, you know, the, the
[Guest]: bigness and the richness of my life is always in the personal, you know, that, you know, you know,
[Guest]: enough about me and my life and my private life and my family to know that. So it would probably
[Guest]: be something very, very personal, like here lies Cole and Trane's human mom, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Cole and Trane, by the way, for the benefit of the listeners are her dogs. And she is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: a big fan of John Coltrane. Maybe you should get a cat called John.
[Guest]: Yeah. I think we are enough of a zoo right now. You know, I think that there's there's enough
[Guest]: people in this in this apartment of multiple species. I think we're done for a while. Once
[Guest]: we're done housebreaking the new puppy, maybe we'll think about, you know, other animals.
[Amit Varma]: I think my epitaph could easily be finally we are done with the bad jokes.
[Guest]: No, I think the amount you have griped about not writing your novel, it should say something like
[Amit Varma]: herein lies many manuscripts. Yeah, I hope not because I hope to get some of them out.
[Amit Varma]: So I really hope not. But that's really the only thing that I will regret if I don't do.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, you know, the one thing I should have done. I mean, the scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: just kind of happened accidentally. And I'm glad it happened. But you know,
[Guest]: you're incredibly young, right? Like you could write lots of novels. It's not like you're an
[Guest]: old person and you're dying. And we're actually discussing your epitaph. Like get to work, dude.
[Amit Varma]: I know. Why did Mohit ask that question? It's very sad. Yeah, though I am just a little short
[Amit Varma]: of the ages when my two heroes Bastia and Orville both died. But I hope to continue for another.
[Guest]: They didn't have the benefit of modern medicine or the hockey stick prosperity that you have
[Amit Varma]: been part of. Listen, I would love to give Vinayak 2000 more episodes of the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so yeah, so that's what one aims for. You try to live the sort of you try to look
[Amit Varma]: after yourself, the world can be going to hell, as I said earlier, but you try to look after
[Amit Varma]: yourself the best that you can and do work that kind of makes you happy, which could be an epitaph
[Guest]: also, I guess. Yeah, thank you for doing this, Amit. Thank you for letting me take over your show.
[Guest]: This was the scene and the unseen from, you know, Amit as a guest and someone else as a host.
[Guest]: I must say that you're a terrible guest. Because you you find it very difficult to answer questions
[Guest]: and I find it very hard to pin you down. But on the other hand, you're a fantastic host. So you
[Guest]: so you chose the profession correctly. And thank you for doing this. And thank you for giving us
[Amit Varma]: 200 199 episodes. No, I promise I'll get back to my core competence now and something I'm much
[Amit Varma]: better at. If you give me 200 episodes of practice as a guest, I'm sure I'll be much better. But there
[Amit Varma]: will be no audiences by then. I mean, you know, the show will need an epitaph then. Listen,
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, I'm so I'm so touched that you, you know, opted to do this and took the effort and reached
[Amit Varma]: out to all these people. And I'm so grateful to all of them. Also, this is like, deeply moving
[Amit Varma]: to me. And I'll probably dissolve in a bucket of tears right after this, because it means a lot to
[Amit Varma]: me. This is one of those things that kind of makes everything worthwhile. And you actually think that
[Guest]: okay, it's, it's not for nothing. So thank you so much. I have to tell you, it was very spontaneous.
[Guest]: And everyone responded with great spontaneity and warmth. It didn't feel like a chore. It felt like
[Guest]: an adventure. And I'm glad it worked out. And my impetus for initially doing it was just, you know,
[Guest]: you have such great thinkers and fans and things like that. But the other impetus for doing it was
[Guest]: I was terrorized at the thought of being the host for a show that would last three hours. And I said,
[Guest]: I have no idea what I'm going to ask, and what we're going to talk about and how much homework I
[Guest]: need to do and things like that. And as we have seen your terrible answerer of questions. So I
[Guest]: thought I will get help from the smartest thinkers and minds that both of us know. And I'm really,
[Amit Varma]: really thrilled that they obliged. Yeah, and we've crossed five hours. So at least in the recording.
[Amit Varma]: So, so congratulations. You as a manager, you as a host and manage what I never could.
[Amit Varma]: So we get back to regular programming next week and miniature episodes that are only three hours
[Unknown]: long. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: seen unseen.in slash stuff. And you can of course browse all 200 episodes of the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen at seen unseen.in and in your favorite podcast app. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen? If so, would you like to support the
[Amit Varma]: production of the show, you can go over to seen unseen.in slash support and contribute any amount
[Amit Varma]: you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you